Dhaka Law Reports

Index of Cases of the Appellate Division
of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh

Vol. LXIX
2017

January—December

Abandoned Buildings (Supplementary
Provisions) Ordinance (LIV of 1985)

Section 5—Section 5 of the Ordinance does

not say that to get a notice for surrender
taking over possession as an abandoned property,
one need be in possession of the entire property.
(Per Md Abdul Wahhab Miah, J, minority)
Shahidul Hague Bhuiyan (Me) vs Chairman First
Court of Settlement (Civil) 69 DLR (4D) 241

Section 5(1)(b)—The property in question
did not answer the description of an abandoned
property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO
16 of 1972 and the same did not vest in the
Government and that the same was enlisted in the
“Kha' lst illegally and without lawful authority
inasmuch as no notice for surrendering or taking

over possession thereof as required under section

irman First Court of Setlcrent (Civil) 69
(4D) 241

Section 5(1)(b)—Statutory notice is a
‘Jurisdictional fact’ or a “collateral fact’ for
inclusion of any property in the ‘Kha' list
published under section $ of the Ordinance and
inclusion of any property in the ‘Kha list without
issuing notice under clause 1(b) thereof will not
give jurisdiction 10 the Court of Settlement to
assume jurisdiction to inquire into the merit of the:
case. (Per Md Abdul Wahhab Miah, J, minority)
Shahidul Haque Bhuiyan (Md) vs Chairman First
Court of Settlement (Civil) 69 DLR (AD)  241

Section S(1)(b)—The provisions for service
of notice upon the occupant of an abandoned
property as provided in article 7 of PO 16 of 1972
read with rule 3 of the Rules, 1972 has, in fact,
been re-introduced and re-asserted in clause (b) of
section (1) of the Ordinance as a precondition
before enlistment of a building of which the
Goverment is not in possession and that notice
for surrendering or taking over possession as
abandoned property under PO 16 of 1972 had
been served. (Per Md Abdul Wahhab Miah, J,
minority) Shahidul Haque Bhuiyan (Md) vs
Chairman First Court of Settlement evi a
DLR (4D) 250

Administrative Tribunal Act, 1980
Vit of 1981)

Section 6(2)(2A)—The Administrative
Appellate Tribunal has no power to-condone the
delay beyond six months from the date of oder or
decision of the Administrative Appellate Tribunal.
What is more, the petitioners failed to explain
satisfactorily the reason for not filing the appeal
within the statutory period of time. Officers’ had in connection with the investigation
of such offences. This power of the government
has been invested to the Commission under sub-
section (1) of section 20 of the Ain. In exercise of
that power the Commission has issued the
notification. It says that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code, the Commission can
empower any officer for investigation of any
offence under the Ain by gazette notification.
Durniti Daman Commission vs Sheikh Amin
Uddin (Civil) 69 DLR (4D) 373

Sections 35(2) and 38(3)—The Ain is a
special law and this Ain will prevail over any
other law. It will be inappropriate if the language
used in Ain is used in narrower meaning and this
provision for scrutiny is for the purpose of
retaining the employees and officers of the Bureau
in the Commission permanently. This appoint-
ment of the investigation officer without scrutiny
will not affect the police reports in view of the
savings clause. The functions of the Commission
shall continue in the same manner as has been
undertaken by the Bureau in view of sub-section
(3) of section 38 of the Ain read with sub-sections
(2) and (3) of section 3 of the Anti-Corruption
Act, 1957. Durniti Daman Commission vs Sheikh
Amin Uddin (Civil) 69 DLR (AD) 373

Sections 38(2)—There cannot be any doubt
to infer that the activities of the defunct Bureau
will be suspended by reason of the abolition of the
urea, rather all activities will continue until the
Commission is fully established. Durniti Daman
Commission vs Sheikh Amin Uddin (Civil) 69
LR (4D) 373

Section 38(3)—There is no scope to hold the
ew that the police reports submitted by the
fficers of the defunct Bureau in the cases can be
id to be illegal or without jurisdiction since the
investigation officer has not been retained by the
Commission after scrutiny. Secondly, the Ain
clearly provides that the investigation into any
allegation pending under the repealed Act shall be
performed by the Commission under the Ain.
Durniti Daman Commission vs Sheikh Amin
Uddin (Civil) 69 DLR (AD) 373

Artha Rin Adalat Ain
(VIII of 2003)

Sections 47 and 6(2)—Power to do complete
Justice—We cannot just be a silent spectator to a
glaring primafacie illegality which has came to
our knowledge and which does not require any
determination of fact and consider it a fit and
proper case to invoke Article 104 of the
Constitution to interfere with the respective
decree of the Adalat passed in the respective suit
So far as it relates to allowing the claim of the
plaintiff-Bank more than 200% over the principal
amount for doing complete justice by ignoring the
provision of section 47 of the Artha Rin Adalat
Ain, 2003 and following a totally wrong
procedure in entertaining and registering the
plaint in violation of section 6(2) of the Ain, 2003.
Rupali Bank Lid vs Md Shamser Ali (Civil) 69
DLR (4D) 366

Bangladesh Abandoned Property
(Control, Management & Disposal)
Order (PO 16 of 1972)

Article 2(1)—The property in question did
not answer the description of an abandoned
property within the meaning of article 2(1) of PO
16 of 1972 and the same did not vest in the
Government and that the same was enlisted in the
‘Kha’ list illegally and without lawful authority
inasmuch as no notice for sumndeing of king
over possession thereof as required —
S(1)(b) of the Ordinance was seep th
occupants. (Per Md Abdul Wahha a
minority) Shahidul Hague Bhuivan (» 9
Chairman First Court of Settlement (Civil)
DLR (4D) 440

Article 6—All the deeds and transfers were
collusively made after PO 16 of 1972 came into
force and these transfers are hit by article 6 of PO *
16.0f 1972. (Per SK Sinha, CJ, majority) Shahidul
Haque Bhuiyan (Md) vs Chairman First Court of
Settlement (Civil) 69 DLR (4D) 241
Chittagong Hill Tracts Regulations
(1 of 1990)

Section 8(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)—The Session Judge
has been given the power to take cognizance of
any offence as a court of original jurisdiction.
This power has been given to a Magistrate in
respect of other Session Divisions of the country.
The three districts have been constituted three
separates civil jurisdictions under three Districts
Judges and a Joint District Judge has been given
power to exercise a court of original jurisdiction
under section 8(4). While exercising such power
te shall follow the existing laws,
customs and
usages of the districts concerned, except the cases
arising out of Family Laws and other customary
laws of the tribes of the districts of Rangamati,
Khagrachori and Bandarban respectively, which
shall be triable by the Mauza headmen and Circle
Chiefs. Against an order, judgment or decree
passed by the Joint District, the District Judge
have been given the appellate power. Government
of Bangladesh represented by Secretary, Ministry
of Finance, Bangladesh vs Rangamati Food
Products Ltd (Civil) 69 DLR (AD) 432

Section 17(3)—The observations that in
Bikram Kishore Chakma (6 BLC 436), it was out
of a dispute over “settlement of government khas
land within Chittagong Hill District” meaning
thereby that in case of disputes over settlement of
land of the three hill districts, the Board has power
fo revise any decision given by the Commissioner
is not a sound view in view of sub-section (3) of
section 17 which clearly provides that the govern-
ment may ‘revise any order made under this
Regulation’. It is only the government which can
revise any decision of the Commissioner made in

exercise of powers under Regulation of 1900. The
Board has no power to decide any dispute from

the decision of the Commissioner over the
settlement of government khas land or any other
matters relating to Vested and Non-resident
Property, Abandoned Property, Land Survey
Record, Land Development Tax, Certificate Case,
Wagf or Debuttor property or any other related
matters which cover Regulation of 1900,
Wagachara Tea Estate Lid vs Md Abu Taher

(Civil) 69 DLR (4D) 381
Code of Civil Procedure
(V of 1908)
Section 2(2)(9) and 144—Judgment

according to the Code means ‘the statements
given by the judge on the grounds of the decree or
order’. It does not confine to decree but also an
order. Decree means ‘the formal expression of an
adjudication which, so far as regards the court
expressing it, conclusively determines the rights
of the parties with regard to all or any of the
matters in controversy in the suit and may be
either preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to
include the rejection of a plaint and the
determination of any question within section 144,
but shall not include

(2) any adjudication from which an appeal
lies as an appeal from an order, or

(b) any order of dismissal for default.

This clause (e) clearly refers to judgment,
decree or award and does not say judgment and
decree. The conjunction *,’ comma, the punctua-
tion mark indicating a pause between parts of the
sentence or separating the words used in the sen-
tence and it should be read disjunctively. Bangla-
desh Bank vs East West Property Developments
(Pvt) Limited (Civil) 69 DLR (AD) 294

