            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(criminal)
Penal Code (XLV of 1860)

Sec. 161 .

Prevention of Corruption Act (II of
1947)

Sec. 5(2)

Illegal gratification—Trap Case—Because of
the tough requirement of proof beyond reasonable
“doubt the laying of trap. is the only method for

in covert manner. Such a method is not prohibited.
For laying a trap the Investigating Officer cannot be
Said to be thereby instigating commission of the
offence. Principles of accomplice evidence cannot
be extended to the evidence of trap witness, because
the latter cannot be termed as accomplice, As to

*Criminal Appeal No. 23 of 1989,
(From the judgment and order dated 14.12.88

Passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in‘Criminal ©

Appeal No. 145 of 1982).

(Criminal)
_ Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Shahabullah (Md)....
MH Rahman J, ATM Afzal J | ......cc. Appellant
and Latifur Rahman J. Vs.
Judgment The State...
June 13,1990. J wu. Respondent*

detecting crimes like bribery which are committed -

The
Dhaka Law Reports

Vol. XLIII
1991

Reports of the Decisions of the Appellate Division
of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh

corroboration of trap witnesses no hard and fast rule
can be given. There may be cases where the Court
will look for independent corroboration—Equally
there may be cases where the Court may accept
evidence of trap witnesses.

Noor Muhammed Vs. The State, 15 DLR (SC) 7,
Abdur Rahman Vs. State, 27 DLR 268; Abdul Jabbar Vs.
State 37 DLR 278; Muhammad Zaheer Nadeem Vs. State,
PLD 1960 (SC) 51; Som Prakash Vs. State of Delhi, AIR
1974 (SC) 989—Referred to and discussed. ..(7, 9 & 12)

Mahbubur Rahman, Senior Advocate, instructed
by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Appellant.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent.

Judgment

MH Rahnjan J : This appeal by special leave is
directed against the judgment and order dated 14.12.88
of the High Court Division, Dhaka ‘passed in
Criminal Appcal No. 145 of 1982 affirming the order
of conviction and sentence dated 7.4.82 of the Special
Judge, Dhaka Division, Dhaka passed in Special Case
No. 9 of 1981 convicting the accused-petitioner under
section 161 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of
Act II of 1947 and sentencing him to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for one year,

2. The prosecution case, in brief, is that the
appellant, Secretary-in-charge of the Mitford Hospital,

            
            2

Dhaka demanded from PW 1, Amjad Hossain, a
supplier of vegetables to that hospital, Tk. 200/- PM
as illegal gratification for the acceptance of the goods
supplied. After paying Tk. 200/- for three months for
July, August and September, 1979 the supplier
decided not to pay any morc bribe. In the month of
October, 1979 when the appellant pressed for payment
PW 1 made a complaint to PW 2 Mr. Abdullah
Chowdhury, an officer of the Bureau of
Anu-Corruption. On demand he gave to PW 2 one
hundred taka note and ten taka notes for taking action
in the matter. A trap was set up for the appellant. PW
3 Sekandar Ali, a peon of the Coscor shop of
Segunbagicha is a witness to the inventory of the
currency notes given by PW 1 to PW 2. The trap party
comprised of PW 1, Amjad Hossain, PW 6, Syed
Mohammad Ali, Police Officer and PWs 4, 5, 7 and 8
police constables. PW 10, Mohammad Ishaqe,
Magistratc, First Class, Dhaka accompanicd the trap
party and he compared the number of the notes with
the number of the inventory and put his signature on
the inventory finding the same to be identical. The
appellant was nabbed when he accepted the marked
notes as illegai yratification. The person of the
appellant was scarched in presence of Magistrate, PW
10 and the Resident Physician of the Hospital (not
examined) and the marked notes were recovered from
his trouscrs.

3. Appellant's contention is that in this case all
the witnesses are either trap or decoy witnesses and the
recovery of notes from the accused has not been
corroborated by any disinterested and independent
witness. It is further contended that the Magistrate
who accompanicd the trap party cannot be regarded as
an independent witness. In support of these
contentions reliance is placed on Abdur Rahman Vs.
State 27 DLR 268 and Abdul Jabbar Vs. State 37 DLR
278.

4. The practice of utilizing Magistratcs in trap
cases has been disapproved by the Pakistan Supreme
Court in a number of decisions. Let us refer to one
Muhammad Zaheer Nadeem Vs. The State, PLD 1960
(SC) 51(55) wherein it is observed:

"It could be said with a great deal of force that
to utilize the services of a Magistrate in the
manner Mr. Minhas allowed himsclf to be used in
the present case, is calculated to affect the

‘standing and respect of the Magistrate, and even
his capacity to do justice in cases coming before


him. It cannot enhance the position of a pers,

occupying a judicial office, in the eyes of those y,

whom he dispenses justice, that he engage,

actively in the carrying out of deceptions ni
frauds of this nature, even though the purpose of

the action may be the public benefit. There 2.

other classes of officials, as well as members of

the public, in whom such behaviour might te
excused or even regarded as fitting, but it canny
possibly be otherwise than harmful to the
mentality and judicial capacity of a Magistrate og,
other persons holding judicial office, and it wouly
necessarily be injurious to the position of the
judiciary as a whole, if the practice of utilizing

Magistrates as decoys and ticksters became

widespread."

5. In the facts of the case it was, however, held
"that the attack upon the reliability of the Magistrate
seems unwarranted" and “the expression trained
evidence" can hardly be applicd to the statement of Mr.
Minhas, the Magistrate.

6. Bribery is an ancient crime. Kautilya in his
Arthasastra thus dwells on the difficulties of tracking
down the tricky government functionaries: "Just as
fish moving under, water cannot possibly be found out
either as drinking or not drinking water, so
government servants employed in the government
work cannot be found out (while) taking money for
themsclves".—Dr. R Ramsatry’s translation of
Kautilya's Arthasastra. (Mysore, 1967).

7. Because of the tough requirement of proof
beyond reasonable doubt the laying of trap is perhaps
the only method for detection of crimes like bribery
which are committed in covert manner. Such a method
is not prohibited in investigation of crimes, and for
laying a trap the investigation officer cannot be said to
be thereby instigating or promoting the commission
of offence.

8. Till such time the detection of crime gets
more sophisticated and science-oricnied when oral
evidence may be supplemented or supplanted by use of
chemicals like phenolphthalcin or some other
advanced devices for tracking crimes the practice of
ulilizing Magistrates in traps, for inspiring
impartiality and credibility to the recovery of bribe
money in corruption cases, is not likely to be
discontinued soon. At this stage, to use the words of
Krishna Iycr, J. in Som Prakash Vs. State of Delhi
AIR 1974 (SC) 989 (989): "Ex cathedra condemnation

payers ny Fee)


            
            of all traps and associate witnesses is neither
pragmatic nor just, nor is it fair to denounce all public
servants indiscriminately."

9. Though in case of accomplice evidence the

rule of prudence has been crystalised into a rule of law

that conviction based on such evidence is to be

corroborated in material particulars, such principle

cannot be extended to the evidence of trap witnesses,
because the latter cannot be termed as accomplices.

10. The view taken in Abdur Rahman Vs. State
27 DLR 268 that the bribe giver PW 1 and his son PW
8 who claimed to have corroborated his father were accomplices and as such their evidence ought to have
 been corroborated cannot be upheld. One of the
decisions on which the learned Single Judge relied is
 Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh Vs. State of Vindhya
 Pradesh AIR 1954 (SC) 322. That decision. was
overruled by five judges in the State of Bihar Vs.
 Baswan Singh AIR 1958 (Sc) 500. It was held that
 evidence of a trap witness is to be tested in the same
"way as any other witness and in a proper case the
1 Court may look for independent corroboration before
 convicting the accused. This view is followed by the
 Indian Supreme Court.in a number of decisions,
 namely, Bhanuprasad Vs. State of Gujrat AIR 1968
 (SC) 1323, .RP Arora Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1973
. (SC) 498.

11. In Abdul Jabbar Vs. State 37 DLR 278 the
 learned Judges rather very broadly laid down the
 Iequirement of independent corroboration of decoy
witnesses. One of the decisions relicd on in that case is
Noor Muhammed’ Vs. The State 15 DLR (SC) 7, but
in that case the prosecution depended mainly on the
bribe giver's testimony.

12. With regard to corroboration of trap
Witnesses no hard and fast rule or guidance can be
given. There may be cases, as in 15 DLR (SC) 7,
Where the Court will look for independent
Corroboration. Equally there may be cascs where the
Court may accept the evidence of the trap witnesses.
In the instant case the trial Court as well as the
Appellate Court unhesitatingly accepted the
Prosecution evidence as to the acceptance and recovery
Of the bribe. PW 1 denied the defence suggestion that

he transplanted the money from his right pocket to the

left pocket of the accuséd. There is'no evidence on
record to show that the witnesses were inimical
towards the appellant or friendly towards the appellant

or that they had any ill motive to implicate the
appellant falsely.

13. We find no good reason to interfere in the
matter. The appcal is dismissed.

Let the appellant surrender to his bail bond and
serve out his sentence.

Ed.
	SUPREME COURT
(Anpellate Division)
Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Siddik Ali being dead his
MH Rahman J, Mustafa  | heirs: Afia Rahman and
Kamal J and Latifur   | others.....Appellants
Rahman J.             | Vs. .
                      |Nurun Nessa Khatun and
Judgment              | others.......
May 28,1990.          |......... Respondents*

Transfer of Property Act (IV of 1882)
Section 116 

Holding-over—Tenant's continuous possession
with landlord's assent creates an implied: contract
constituting a tenancy by holding-over. Such a
tenancy cannot be created by tenant's continuance of
possession alone—there must also be the assent of
the landlord, which may be expressed or implied. It
may be evidenced by acceptance of rent or by other
circumstances. Where the lessor dissents there cannot
be any holding-over. Absence of ‘dissent will. not
necessarily imply assent, but from the’ tenant's
continuous possession’ for a’ {ong period, without
contrary indication from the landlord may constitute
an implied assent. Implied assent is a question of
fact inferable from the length of possession and other
circumstance excluding an inference ‘of landlord's
dissent.

Province of East Pakistan Vs. Nakul Das‘Mridha &
another 20'DLR (Dhaka) 769 ref. kata (7, 12-14)

 MA Wahhab Miah, Advocate, instructed by

Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For.

the Appellants. . '

~ . *Civil Appeal No. 21 of 1985. ”
(From the judgment and decree dated 13.10.83

passed by the High Court Division, Comilla Bench, in

Second Appeal No. 94 of 1968).

            
            . Habib Ahmed, Advocate, instructed by Aftab
Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondent
Nos. 1 to 10.

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 2 to 9(a) to 9(J), 11
to 15,

Judgment

MH Rahman J: This appcal by special Icave,
at the instance of the plaintiffs, is against the
judgment dated 13.10.83 passed by a Single Bench of
the High Court Division, Comilla, in Sccond Appeal
No. 94° of 1968 sctting aside the judgment dated
31.12.66 passed by the Subordinate J udge, Second
Additional Court, Sylhet in Title Appeal No. 69 of
1965 affirming the judgment dated 21.12.64 passed by

the Munsif, Second Court, Sylhet in Title Suit No.
251 of 1961.

2. Siddik Ali, the predecessor of the appellants,
filed the suit for declaration of title in respect of the
schedule 2 land and for recovery of khas possession
with mesne profits. His case is that the land of first
schedule which includes the sccond schedule land
belonged to one Benode Behari Das in maliki right.
Bharat Chandra Das used to live on the first schedule
land as a tenant. He exccuted a bi-lateral registered deed
of lease in respect of.the first schedule land on 6th
Bhadra, 1346 BS (Ext. 3). After the death of Bharat his
sons Surendra and Bhupendra continucd to possess the
land by living in the, eastern portion and cutting
bamboos and trees and enjoying fruits from the
western portion: One Sajjad Ali;
predecessor-in-interest of defendant Nos.. 1-10,
purchased the maliki right of the landlord Benode in
Chak No. 95, Thereafter he brought partition suit No.
87 of 1954. In the final decree of that suit the first
“schedule land together with other lands fell to the share
of Sajjad Ali. While in possession Surendra and
Bhupendra sold the first schedule land to the plaintiff
by a registered kabala dated 8th Kartick, 1360 BS (Ext.

2). After purchase the plaintiff constructed a new hut
after dismantling the dilapidated hut of his vendor and
inducted there pro-defendant No. 20 as his chowkider,
In absence of pro-defendant No. 20 defendant Nos. 1 to
10, the successors of Sajjad Ali, along with other
defendants trespassed into Plot No. 1 of schedule 2 on
29th Chaitra, 1367 BS. Proforma-defendant No. 20
filed a criminal case against the defendants and the
same was dismissed on 30.8.61. The principal

defendants, being encouraged by the order of acquintal,
dispossessed the plainuff from suit plot No. 1. During
the pendency of the suit the plainuff and pro-defendant
No. 20 were dispossessed from plot No. 2 as well.

3. The case of the contesting defendant Nos, l,
2,3 and 5 to 10 is that Benode Behari Das, while in
khas possession of the disputed land and other lands of
his taluk, sold his entire interest in the taluk to Sajjad
Ali by a kabala dated 15th Chaitra, 1367 Bs
corresponding to 29th March, 1951. Subsequently,
Sajjad Ali in execution of a partition decree took
delivery of possession of the suit land through Court,
Irshad Ali, defendant No. 28 in the Title Suit No. 87
of 1954 being bafficd in that partition suit, created a
collusive kabala in the name of his cousin, the
plaintiff.

4. The Trial Court decreed the suit. After
keeping aside the evidence of the interested witness,
PW 1, the brother of the- plaintiff and PW 3, the
plaintiff's chowkider, but considering the evidence of
PWs 2 and 4 and the admission of DW 1 that
pro-defendant No. 20, the chowkider, was living in the
suit homestead for the last 11/12 years in his present
homestead in the eastern portion of the 1st schedule
land that covered the Commissioner's Chitta Plot
Nos. 5-12‘lying in the first schedule land and the
plaintiff's document, Ext. 3 the deed of lease and the

rent receipts the Trial Court found that Sajjad Ali

purchased the landlord Benode's rent-receiving interest
only and he did not get possession of the suit land; and
that the plaintiff's predecessor Bharat continued to be
in possession as a tenant under Benode Behari. After

considering the inspection. report of the

Commissioner Ext. 5 which showed that a number of
bamboo and fruit trees were cut away 3/4 days before
the date of inspection the Trial Court observed that had

the defendants been in possession they would not have
cut away the trees,

5. The Trial Court found the evidence of DWs 1
and 2 as discrepant and biased. For proving their case
the defendants produced several documents. Exts. A
and E are respectively the certified copies of the decree
of the partition suit and the writ of delivery of
Possession: showing that the defendants took
Possession of the suit land on 28.8.60. Ext. B, the
certified copy of a judgment dated 23.5.61, shows the
recording of the suit land in the names of the principal
defendants. The Trial Court discarded Exts. A and E as
the plaintiff was not a party to the earlier partition



            
            suit. It also discarded the judgment Ext. B because it
was passed on 23.5.61 aftcr the plaintiff's
dispossession on 12.4.1961.

6. In affirming the decision of the Trial Court
the Court of appeal below further considered the recital
in Ext. 3, the nature of the disputed land, the evidence
of PWs, particularly PW 2 Giasuddin Khan and PW 4
Jamini Kanta who had their homesteads very near the
suit land. After considering the recital in Ext. 3, the
lease-deed, that the landlord Benode reversed his right
to enhance rent and scttle the land to others the
Appellate Court observed that the landlord was not
very anxious to take back the land in his khas
possession for re-scttling the samc to others; that
there was no evidence of any occasion for
enhancement of rent or that aftcr expiry of the five
years the landlord determined the tenancy or Icased out
the land to others. The Appellate Court further
considered that the disputed land, the western part of
schedule 1 was a chara land of the homestead porton of
Surendra and Bhupendra to the east and it was not
probable that Surendra and Bhupendra or their fathcr
Bharat gave up their tenancy after a period of five
years. The Appellate Court discarded the defence case
that Irshad Ali being baffled as a defendant in an earlier
Title Suit No. 87 of 1954 got the collusive kabala in
the name of his cousin, the plaintiff, as the plaintiff's
kabala was of much earlier date than the alleged
discomfiture of Irshad. After holding that Benode was
not in khas possession of the land of first schedule
including the suit land at the time of the transfer to
Sajjad Ali the Appellate Court affirmed the findings of

the Trial Court that Sajjad Ali simply purchased the .

Tent receiving interest of Benode in respect of the
disputed land and he’ got that interest in his saham in
the subsequent suit for partition. It, however, did not

Consider the defendants' documents Exts. A, E and B.

7. In Second Appeal the learned Single Judge of
the High Court Division dismissed the suit on the
8round that neither the Courts below considered the
question of possession and dispossession upon taking
into account the factum of delivery of possession
through Court as proved by defendant's oral and
documentary evidence Exts. A, E, and B.

8. The learned Judge also referred to Province sof
East Pakistan Vs. Nakul Das Mridha & another 20
DLR 69 wherein it was held:

"It is not necessary that acceptance of rent-is

to be proved in all cases. It is enough to show that
there was assent to the continuation in possession
of the land in question.”

9. According to the learned Single Judge, there
being no evidence that after the expiry of the lease
Bharat or his son ever paid rent either to Benode or to
the subsequent transferee, Sajjad Ali or that the
landlord ever assented to the lessces continuing in
possession the Courts below were not justificd in
finding title with the plaintiff on the basis of his
purchase by the kabala Ext. 2.

10. Before the High Court Division the
respondent contended that on the death of Bharat his
sons had no saleable interest in view of the decision in
32 DLR (AD) 170 but the High Court ‘Division
declined to examine that question in view of its
finding that Bharat could not be a tenant by holding
over.

11. Leave was Fanelli to consider whether the
concurrent finding as to possession of the plaintiff's
predecessors has justifiably been interfered with in
second appeal.

12. There being no issue in the Courts below
whether the lease created by Ext. 3 was for agricultural
purpose or whether it was a non-agricultural tenancy
we need not examine in this case whether the
provisions of section 116 of the Transfer of Property
Act is applicable or whether the principle of holding
over can be applied to an agricultural lease as rules of
justice, equity and good conscience. However, as one
of the two grounds on which the High Court Division
dismissed the suit is that the plaintiff failed to prove
his vendor's case of holding over Jet us refer to section
116 of the Transfer of Property Act. The section reads
as follows:

"116. Effect of holding over.—If a lessee or
under-lessee of property remains in possession
thereof after the determination of the Icase granted
to the lessee, and the lessor or his legal
representative accepts rent from the lessee or
under-lessee, or otherwise assents to his
continuing in possession, the lease is, in the
absence of an agreement to the contrary, renewed
from year to ycar, or from month to month,
according to the purpose for which the property is
leased, as specified in section 106."

13. In the lease Ext. 3 there was no agreement
contrary to the terms of holding over.

            
            14. From the express provision of the above
section itis clear that after the determination of a lease
continuous possession by a tenant with the assent of
the landlord creates an implicd contract, and a tenancy
by holding over is constituted. Tt is needless to add that
such a tenancy cannot be created by the tenant's
conunuance of possession alone. There must also be
the assent of the landlord. That assent may be
expressed or implicd. It may be evidenced by
acceptance of rent or by other circumstances. Where
the lessor dissents or docs not assent cither expressly
or implicdly there cannot be any holding over.
Absence of dissent will not necessarily imply assent,
but from the tenant's continuous possession for a long
period, without any contrary indication from the
landlord, may in certain circumstances constitute an
implied assent. The question of implicd assent is a
question of fact. It may be inferred from the length of
period of possession and other circumstances
excluding an inference of dissent by the landlord. The
finding of the Courts below as to the right of the
plainuff on the basis of continuous possession after
the expiry of the Icase Ext. 3 is based on good
rcasonings and the Iearned Single Judge ought not to
have interfered with that finding,

15. For the Appellate Court's non-considcration
of the defendants' documents Exts. A, E and B which
were discarded on due considerations by the Trial

Court the judgment of affirmance need not be
interfered with when we find nothing wrong in the
Trial Court's treatment of the documentary evidence
adduced by the defendants,

In the result, the appeal is allowed. Prayer for
substitution is allowed after setling aside abatement.
No costs,

Ed.

SUPREME COUMT
(Appellate Divishon)
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Abmed CJ,    | Nurul Islam and others
MH Rahman J, ATM Afzal J | Accused Appellants
and Latifur Rahman J     |     Vs,
Judgment                 | The State......
August 16, 1990.         | ......Resoident*


Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 5

Credibility of witnesses—Judges of the High
Court Division have not considered the material
discrepancies, contradictions and ormmiissiotia of
eye-wilnesses for which an error has crept in the
judgment resulting in the conviction of the
appellants. On consideration of the ¢videnes
particularly of the eye-witnesses the appellarits are

held to be entitled to the benefit of doubt and
acquitted.   ...... (9)

Serajul Huq, Senior Advocate, instructed ty
Sharifuddin Chakladar, Advocate-on-Record For
the Appellants,

B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record —- For the
Respondent, °

Judgment
Latifur Rahman J: This appeal by special
leave at the instance of seven accustd-appellants is
directed apainst the order of CONnVICLION and scrtetice
passed by the High Court Division (Circuit Bench)
Barisal in Criminal Appeal No. 65 of 1925,

2. The seven appellants along with others were
put on trial in an offence under sections 302/34 of the
Penal Code before the Sessions Judge, Bhola in
Sessions Case No. 19 of 1984, The Sessions Sudge
convicted fourteen accused including the seven
appellants under sections 302/34 of the Penal Code
and sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for life
with a fine of Tk, SOO/- each, in default, to sulfa
rigorous imprisonment for six months and the rest of
ihe accused persons were acquitted. On appeal by the

*Criminal Appeal No. 15 of 1988.

(From the judgment and order dated 5.2.24
passed by the High Court Division, Circuit Bench,
Barisal in Criminal Appeal No. 65 0f 1965),


            
            convicted 14 appellants the High Court Division
affirmed the conviction and sentence of the present
seven appellants only.

3. The prosecution case is, that on 3.10.76 at
about 7 AM informant PW 1 Mosharraf Hossain
along with his brother deceased Kanchan, PW 2
Tofazzal and his neighbour PW 3 Mokhlcsur Rahman
started towards Bangla Bazar and when they reached
near the house of appellant Salem the accused persons
attacked them being armed with dagger, gupti, lathis,
etc. According to the First Information Report
appellants Syed Ali Mal Kashem, Sadck Jamader,
Shahjahan and others dealt dagger and gupti blows to
deceased Kanchan in the path-way. From there the
deceased was dragged inside the house of appellant No.
3 Salem Howlader while PWs 2 and 3 tried in vain to
save the deccased from the hands of the accuscd
persons. On hearing hue and cry of the informant and
others present in the place of occurrence, PW 6, father
of the deceased, PW 7 brother of the deceased and PWs
8 and 10 immediately came to the place of occurrence
and saw the taking away of the dead body. The accused
persons fled away and the dead body was subsequently
recovered from the jungle behind the house of accused
Salem Howlader.

4. The defence case is one of innocence. The
defence case, as it appears from the trend of
cross-examination to the prosecution witnesscs, is,
that the deceased had many enemies and the deceased
was not a person of good moral character and that he
Was murdered in the previous night and his dead body
Was thrown thereafter in the jungle. The defence denied
the time, place and manner of occurrence as alleged by
the prosecution.

5. In this case Ieave was granted to consider the
glaring inconsistencies and contradictions in the
evidence of the four eye-witnesses, namcly, PWs 1, 3,
7 and 18, which cast a doubt as to the truth of the
prosecution case or at least create reasonable doubt in
the prosecution case.

6. In view of the Icave order, the fate of the case
really depends on a truc evaluation of the
eye-witnesses and all other witnesses who hcard the
Occurrence from the cye witnesses and saw the dead
body are not very relevant for our purpose. Hence, we
‘will consider the evidence of the cye-witnesses herein
below. 


7. PW 1 Mosharraf Hossain is the full brother of
deceased Kanchan. He lodged the First Information
Report. According to his testimony on the day of
occurrence at about 7 in the morning he along with his
deceased brother and PW 3 were going towards Bangla
Bazar and when they reached near the house of
appellant Salem Hawladcer, the accused persons
attacked his brother Kanchan on the road and dragged
the deceased towards the house of accused Salam. He
further stated that there were dao, gupti and lathis in
the hands of the accused persons and they assaulted the
deceased inside the house and as a result of which he
died. He further testified that hearing hue and cry,
witnesses came and the accused persons fled away and
he narrated about the incident of murder by the accused
persons to the witnesses who came soon after the
occurrence. The dead body was recovered from a jungle
behind the house of accused Salam. In
cross-examination he admitted that his brother
deceased Kanchan had enmity with many pcople and
before the occurrence several persons tricd to assault
him and he had many enemics in the village. He also
admitted that his brother used to come late at night as
he used to do village salish. PW 1 in the First
Information Report stated that appellants Syed Mal
Kashem, Shahjahan and Sadek Jamader assaulted
deceased Kanchan with daggers in their hands on the
road and when the accused persons tricd to drag his
brother inside the house of Salem Howlader they failed
to obstruct the accused persons. It is very curious to
note that in the First Information Report PW 1 named
specifically Syed Mal Hashem, Sadck and Shahjahan
as inflicting severe dagger blows on the deceased, but
in the testimony before the Court he has omitted to
specifically name these accused persons as inflicting
dagger blows on the deceased. On the contrary he has
stated in court that the accused persons attacked his
brother and caught hold of him and took him inside the
house of appellant Salam Hawladcr. This is a very
material omission on the part of PW 1 who is an eye
witness and was accompanying the deceased at the
time of occurrence. He further stated that he disclosed
the names of the accused persons to the witnesses,
who immediately came to the place of occurrence. PW
3 Mokhlesur Rahman, another eye-witness of the
occurrence, testified that on the date of occurrence at
about 7 in the morning the occurrence took place. On
that day a few minutcs before the occurrence he along
with PW 1 Tofazzal Hossain and deceased Kanchan
were going towards Bangla Bazar and when they

            
            reached near the house of accused Salem Hawlader the
seven appellants attacked the deceased with dagger,
gupti and:took him towards the house of accused
Salam. They having failed to rescue the deceased raised
hue and cry and many people came. He also stated that
the accused persons assaulted Kanchan and dragged
him towards the jungle and killed him. In
cross-examination he stated that he did not know as to
who kept the dead body of deceased in the jungle. This
vague statement in his cross-examination belies the
fact that the accused persons assaulted the deceased and
carried: the dead body to jungle. PW 17 Masuma
Khatun testified that at the time of occurrence she was
standing near her latrine and from where she saw
Shahjahan, Saber, Ishaque, Sadek, Mofazzal and
others assaulting deceased Kanchan. She testified that
the accused persons dragged the deceased and appellant
Salem gave a dagger blow in the chest of the deceased
and dragged the dead body towards the north near a
banana tree and seeing the police the accused persons
fled away. In cross-examination she stated that she
was 65 years and her eye sight was not good. She
admitted that she had some boundary dispute with the
accused. In cross-examination she stated that she heard
that accused Salam inflicted dagger blow in the chest
of deceased Kanchan and other accused persons
assaulted him. This statement in cross-examination
clearly shows that she did not herself see the
occurrence as she testified in her cross-examination
that she heard about the inflicting of dagger injury by
Salem and inflicting of injuries by others. An eye
witness who really saw the occurrence would not
normally admit in this way. PW 18 Abul Kashem
Hawlader is another eye witness who was going by the
same pathway. He saw the deceased. PWs 1, 2 and
others going towards Bangla Bazar and at that time the
accused persons started beating them. He having failed
to rescue deceased Kanchan, accused Shahijahan struck
the deceased and carried him towards their house.
Thereafter the deceased was assaulted inside the house
of Sadek and at the order of accused Nurul Islam, Syed
Mal assaulted the deceased with a gupti. In
cross-examination he testified that he is the nephew of
PW 1 Mosharraf Hossain and accused Saber Hawlader
is also his nephew. From the evidence of PW 18 it
appears that he did not specifically name any of the
appellants in his examination-in-chicf before the
court. Further he introduced a new story that on the
order of accused Nurul Islam accused Syed Mal gave a
gupti blow to the deceased. None of the other eye
witnesses stated that at the order of appellant Nury
Islam, appellant Syed Mal Kasem gave the gupti
blow.

8. Apart from the eye-witnesses as discusseg
above, another very material fact is that PW 1 deposeg
that hearing hue and cry many people came to the
place of occurrence and he disclosed about the assay};
by the accused persons. PW 6 Bazlur Rahman who jg
father of PW 1 and deceased Kanchan testified that he
heard from PW 1 that his brother was killed ang
hearing this he rushed to the place of occurrence, |p
cross-examination he stated that he could not say as to
who killed his son and that nobody disclosed the name
of the accused persons to him. This fact of not hearing
the names of the accused persons by the father is Very
material when hearing hue and cry of his son, PW 6
immediately went to the place of occurrence. PW |
Mosharraf Hossain having seen the occurrence, as
testified by him, he would have been the first person
to disclose the name of the assailants of his brother to
his father, PW 6. But PW 6 admitted in
cross-examination that nobody disclosed the name of
the accused persons. This throws a doubt as to the
prosecution case that PW 1 is not an eye-witness of
the occurrence and he did not tell the truth.

9. Thus, on a careful consideration of the
eye-witnesses as discussed above, it is very difficult to
rely upon their evidence in view of the glaring
omissions and contradictions in their testimonies in
court. The learned Judges of the High Court Division
have not considered the material discrepancies,
contradictions and omissions of the eye-witnesses in
their judgment for which an error has crept in the
Judgment resulting in the conviction of the
appellants.
On a careful consideration of the evidence on
record particularly of the eye-witnesses, we are of the
view that the appellants are entitled to a benefit of
doubt and they are acquitted. Accordingly, the appeal
is allowed and the order of conviction and sentence is
set aside,

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Ayesha Khatun (Musammat)
MH Rahman J, ATM         | ......... Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J |
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
Judgment                 | Musammat Jahanara Begum
April 11, 1990           | & others........Respondents*
state Acquisition & Tenancy Act
(XXVIII of 1951)

Section 96

Registration Act (XVI of 1908)

Section 47

Pre-emption—Cause of action—Cause of action
for pre-emption accrues on the date of registration of a
sale deed when registration is compulsory, because the
right of pre-emption arises on completion of a
transfer. If a pre-emption application is filed before
registration of the sale deed, it is not to be dismissed
on the ground of pre-maturity if the same is registered
during the pendency of pre-emption proceeding.
  Abdur Rahman Vs. Maklis Ali, 31 DLR (AD) 118;
  Lebu Mia Vs. Ganesh Chandra, 34 DLR (AD) 220, Aftab
  Ali Vs. Wahab Ali, BCR 1982 AD 87 relicd. (6 & 7)

  TH Khan, Senior Advocate, (MA Wahab Miah,
  Advocate, with him) instructed by Sharifuddin
  Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record—For the Appellant.

Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 1.
Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 2-42.

Judgment

MH Rahman J: This appeal by special leave,
at the instance of the pre-emptor, is directed against
the judgment and order dated 6th August, 1985 of the
High Court Division, Rangpur Bench, Rangpur in
Civil Revision No.202 of 1983 setting aside the
Concurrent decision of the Trial Court and the lower
Appellate Court allowing the pre-emptor's application
Ce ee
*Civil Appeal No. 98 of 1985.

(From the judgment and order dated 6th August,
1985 passed by the High Court Division, Rangpur
Bench in Civil Revision No.202 of 1983).

Uder section 96 of the State Acquisition and Tenancy
ct.

2. The appellant instituted Miscellancous Case
No.91 of 1979 in the Court of Subordinate Judge
Pabna for pre-empting a deed of sale executed on 20th
March, 1979, but registered on 21st July, 1980 on the
ground that she was a non-nolificd contiguous
landholder of the land that was transferred to the
stranger-pre-emptee, respondent No.1. After coming
to know about the transfer on 18th June, 1979 she
filed the case on 20th July, 1979.

3. Respondent No.1 contested the case on the
ground that the application for pre-emption was not
maintainable in law and the same was barred by
limitation and bad for defect of partics, that she
purchased the land with the knowledge of the
pre-emptor and, further, that by virtuc of a subsequent
purchase of another plot from the same holding on
23rd March, 1979 she became a co-sharer of the
vendor.

4. The Trial Court allowed the pre-emption after
finding that the pre-emptor was a contiguous
landholder and the pre-emptee did not become a
co-sharer by the subsequent purchase. The decision of
the Trial Court was affirmed by the Appellate Court
after holding that the pre-emptce's subsequent
purchase did not defeat the pre-emptor's right that
accrued on 20.3.79. The High Court Division,
however, set aside the judgment of the Court below
after finding the right of the pre-emptor accrued on
21st July, 1980 the date when the kabala under
pre-emption was registered, but the pre-emptee's right
as a co-sharer by purchase accrued earlier on 23.3.79.

5. The appellant's case is that the kabala under
pre-emption was exccutcd on 20th March, 1979 and
registered on 21st July, 1980, but the pre-emptee
purchased a share of the vendor in the case holding by a
kabala executed subsequently on 23rd March, 1979 and
registered on 22nd July, 1980. It is asserted that the
High Court Division wrongly gave the date of the
registration of the pre-emptee's kabala as 18th April,
1979. It is contended that the date of exccution is of ~
fundamental importance under section 47 of the
Registration Act, 1908 and the pre-emptee having
purchased a share in the case holding three days after
the execution of the kabala under pre-emption the
pre-emptce's subsequent acquisition of co-sharership
by purchase will not defeat the pre-emptor's right that
accrued earlier on 20th March, 1979.

            
            6. This case involves interpretation of both
section 96 of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act,
and section 47 of the Registration Act. IU is now a
settled principle of Jaw that the cause of action under
section 96 of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act
accrues on the date of the registration of the deed of
sale, when registration is compulsory—sce Abdur
Rahman Vs. Maklis Ali 31 DLR (AD) 118, This is
because the right of pre-emption ariscs on the
completion of the transfer. It could not be said to have
completed carlicr by reason of section 47 of the
Registration Act though thereunder the instrument of
transfer commences to operate from earlier date. If ,
however, an application for pre-emption is filed before
the complction of the transfer i.c. the registration of
the sale, as in the appellant's case, it is not to be
dismissed on the ground of prematurity if the deed of
transfer is registered during the pendency of the
pre-emption procecding—sce Lebu Miah Vs. Ganesh
Chandra, 34 DLR (AD) 220 and Aftab Mia Vs. Wahab
Ali, BCR 1982 (AD) 87.

7. We therefore, hold that the appellant's
application for pre-emption is maintainable, but she is
not entitled to pre-emption because her right as a
contiguous landholder that accrucd on 21st July, 1980
had been undermined by respondent's right of
co-sharership by purchase that had accrucd carlicr on
23rd March, 1979. The respondent appears to have
stolen a march. Her right accrued on the basis of
section 47 of the Registration Act but the appellant's
right accrucd as per provision of section 96 of the
State Acquisition and Tenancy Act.

In the result, the appeal is dismissed.
No costs. .
Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ | Badsha Mia and others
MH Rahman J and      | ......... Appellants
Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
Judgment             | Abdul Latif Majumder and
July 30, 1990        | others........ Respondents*

Contempt of Court Act (XII of 1926)
Section 3

Contempt procecding—There being no specific
denial of the incident stated in the petition for
contempt of court, High Court Division correctly
found the appellants guilty of contempt of court,
Power of a High Court to institute a contempt
proceeding is a special jurisdiction which is inherent
in all courts of record and the High Court Division can
deal with it summarily and adopt its own procedure,
Normally contempt proceedings are disposed of by
affidavits and counter-affidavits. Question of taking
evidence would have arisen if the petitioners
specifically denied the statements made in the petition
for drawing up a proceeding for contempt.

Sukdev Singh Vs. Hon'ble CJ AIR 1954 SC 186 ref,

MG Bhuiyan, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

Mahbubey Alam, Advocate instructed by Md.
Sajjadul Huq, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 3.

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 1-2 and 4-12.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: This direct appeal arises
from the judgment and order passed by the High Court
Division, Comilla Bench, Comilla on 12.8.85 in
Civil Rule No. 392(F) of 1983 (Contempt) arising
out of First Appeal No. 222 of 1981 convicting the
appellants for contempt of court and sentencing cach
of them to suffer simple imprisonment for 7 (seven)

*Criminal Appeal No. 39 of 1985.

(From the Judgment and order dated 12th
August, 1985 passed by the High Court Division,
Comilla Bench, Comilla in Civil Rule No. 392(F) of 1983
(Contempt) arising out of FA No. 222 of 1981).

            
            days. Appellant No.1 was sentenced to pay a fine of
Tk. 1,000/-, in default to suffer further simple
imprisonment for 3 days and appellant Nos. 2, 3 and
4 were further sentenced to pay a fine of Tk.500/- in
default to suffer simple imprisonment for 3 days more
cach.
2. The short fact that will be necessary for
disposal of this appeal, is that, the
Jaintiffs-respondents obtained a decree in Title Suit
No. 73 of 1980 from the Court of 3rd Subordinate
Judge, Comilla on 6.7.81. The plaintiffs’ title to the
suit land was decreed and thcir possession was also
confirmed except the land in plot No. 255 was to be
recovered by way of execution of the decree and by
dismantling the huts therefrom. The plaintiffs started
Title Execution Case No. 5 of 1981 for execution of
the decree for costs and for obtaining possession of
Plot No. 255 only. Defendants, including the
Appellants preferred First Appeal-No. 222 of 1981 in
the High Court Division against the aforesaid
judgment and decree and in Civil Rule No. 1297(F) of
1981 got an order of stay of Title Execution Case No.
Sof 1981 till disposal of the First Appeal. Thereafter
the respondents filed an application for injunction in
the said First Appeal praying for restraining the
defendants from interfering with the peaceful
possession of the plaintiffs in the suit land, except the
land of Plot No. 255. The High Court Division after
hearing the parties by an order dated 7.1.82 allowed the
Plaintiffs’ prayer for temporary injunction.
3. This order of injunction as granted by the
High Court Division in favour of the
Plaintiffs-respondents having been violated by the
appellants, an application was moved on 14.12.83 and
the present Rule of contempt was issued.

4. Inthe petition for drawing up a procecding for
Contempt of court, the respondents stated that they
grew IRRI paddy in the suit Plot No. 5/2 arca 0'7
(Southern portion) and suit plot No. 6.arca 0.10
(Southern portion) through bargadar Abdul Karim son
late Abbas Ali of Village Dhapar. It was also stated
iN the petition that the plaintiff No. 2 Ayub Ali
ajumdar himself had’ grown paddy in suit Plot No.
264/11 arca "20 acres (south western portion) which he
» 80t amicably from amongst his co-sharers, It was
further ‘Stated that the said paddy was ripe for
harvesting and on 5.12.1983 at 8-30 AM the
appellants forcibly and in violation of the order of
temporary injunction passed by the High Court


Division on 7.1.82, entered into the suit plots along
with five hired labourers and started cutting the paddy
grown and possessed by the respondents. Bargadar
Abdul Karim protested in vain and he reported the
matter to Plaintiff No. 2 Ayub Ali Majumdar who at
once rushed to the suit land and reminded the
appellants that they were cutting paddy in violation of
the order of the High Court Division and also warned
them of dire consequences. At this Appellant No.1
Badsha Mia uttered derogatory remarks regarding the
injunction order of the High Court Division. The
contemners cut and took away paddy from the three
plots measuring in total an area of one acre.

5. The appellants against whom the said
contempt rule was issued appeared and filed a joint
counter-affidavit making a gencral denial of the
Statement without specifically controverting the
statement of forcibly cutting and taking away paddy
on 5.12.83 at 8-30 AM from the suit land.

6. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division considered the counter-affidavit filed by the
appellants wherein it was found that the appellants did
not specifically deny the statement made in the
petition for drawing up the contempt Rule, that on
5.12.83 at 8-30 AM the appellants forcibly took away
paddy grown by the respondents from Plot No. 5/2, 6
and 264/11 or that no incident took place as stated in
the petition. There being no specific denial by the
present appellants in their counter-affidavit, the
learned Judges of the High Court Division believed
that the petitioners in violation of the order of the
High Court Division cut and took away ripe paddy on
5.12.83 as stated in the petition. There being no
specific denial by the appellants, the learned Judges of
the High Court Division did not take any evidence in
the matter and consequently found them guilty for
contempt of court.

7. Mr. MG Bhuiyan, learned Advocate appearing
for the appellants, submits that though there is no
specific denial by the appellants that on the day of
occurrence they cut and took away paddy from the suit
land but there is evasive denial of the same.

8. Ona perusal of the counter-affidavit we find
that there is no specific denial of the incident as stated
by the respondents in their petition for issuing a Rule
for contempt of court. In that view of the matter, the
learned Judges of the High Court Division correctly
found that the appellants are guilty of contempt of
Court.

            
            9. Mr Bhuiyan next contends that the conviction
and sentences of the appellants without taking
evidence is also not warranted by law. This
observation of the learned Advocate is wholly
untenable because power of a High Court to institute :
contempt proceeding is a special jurisdiction which is
inherent in all courts of record and the High Court
Division can deal with it summarily and adopt its'
own procedure, Normally contempt proceedings are
disposed of by affidavits and counter-affidavits.
Further, the question of taking evidence in the present
case would have arisen provided the petitioners would
have specifically denied the statements made in the
petition for drawing up a proceeding for contempt. In
the case of Sukhdev Singh Vs. Hon'ble CJ S Teja
Singh and the Hon'ble Judges of the Pepsu High
Court at Patiala reported in AIR 1954 Supreme Court
186, their Lordships have held as follows :

"We hold, therefore, that the Code of
Criminal Procedure docs not apply in matters of
contempt triable by the High Court. The High
Court can deal with it summarily and adopt its
own procedure. All that is necessary is that the
procedure is fair and that the contemner is made
aware of the charge against him and given a fair
and reasonable opportunity to defend himself."

Thus, the points raised by the learned Advocate
for the appellants fail.

Consequently, the appeal is dismissed and the
order of conviction and sentence passed against the
appellants are maintained. The bail granted by this
Court on 1.9.85 is vacated and the petitioners are
directed to surrender to their bail bond forthwith. The
Deputy Commissioner, Comilla will report

compliance of the order of this Court within 2(two)
months from date.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,     | Idris Ali Bhuiyan,..,...
MH Rahman J, ATM ALzal J. | .... Petitioner
and Latifur Rahman J.     | Vs,
Judgment                  | Enamul Haque and anr.
July 17, 1990,            | ........ Respondents*

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 105

There could be no ground for review once the case
was disposed of on fact and law as well,

Per Latifur Rahman J: (agreeing): Review of g
judgment can be made where there is an error apparent on the
face of the record or that the Court's attention was not drawn
to any particular statutory provision of law for which an
error has crept in the judgment.

Sow Chandra Kanta & another Vs. Sheik Habib AIR.
1975 SC 1500 relied.

MH Khandkar, Senior Advocate, (Abdus Salam
Khan, Advocate with him) instructed by Md. Aftab

Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner
(in both petitioners).

Khandker Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior
Advocate, Supreme Court instructed by Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondents (in both the petitions).

Judgement

ATM Afzal J: Facts material for answering

the point raised in these two review petitions arc as
follows:

2. The petitioner as plaintiff instituted Title Suit
No. 589 of 1983 in the 1st Court of Assistant Judge,

Dhaka impleading the respondents as the defendants,
inter alia,

(a) For a decree declaring that the Scheduled
sale-deed No. 14705 dated 8.8.1972 is adjudged as
void; delivered up and cancelled and declaring that the
so-called sale deed transferring to the defendant No.1 2

*Civil Review Petition Nos. 14 and 12 of 1990.

(From the Judgment dated 19 April, 1990 passed

by the Appellate Division in Civil Petition Nos. 470 and
471 of 1989),

.

            
             annas 6 gondas 2 karas and 2 karanti share of Syed
Wazed Ali Azam in the suit property is not binding on
the plainuff.

  (b) For a decree declaring the titile to the share of 2

 annas 6 gondas 2 karas 2 karanti share of Syed Wazed

Ali Azam in the suit plot, in favour of the plaintiff.

3. Admittedly one Syed Md. Ali Azam was the
original owner of the disputed land who dicd Icaving
several heirs including a son named Syed Wazcd Ali
Azam, the plaintiff's vendor, who, according to the
plaintiff, sold his share to him (the plaintiff) by a
registered salc-deed on 11.9.1980. Defendant No. 1, on
the other hard, contended that aforesaid Syed Wazed
Ali Azam and his other co-sharers transferred the suit
property in favour of the defendant by a registered deed
of sale dated 8.8.72 (impugned in the suit). Further the
plaintiff was a tenant under the defendant and in a suit
for his eviction, TS 55 of 1977, the defendant got
decree which was maintained upto this Division.

4. The Trial Court decreed the suit holding, inter
alia, that the suit was not time-barred. On appeal, the
learned Additional District Judge, 4th Court Dhaka
found that the plaintiff's vendor Syed Wazed Ali Azam
admitted in cross-examination that he came to know
about the disputed document fo the degendant in
February 1975 and that it was forged by forging his
LTI but he did not file any suit to canccl the
defendant's document at any time. It was observed that
in view of the circumstances of the case, there arises
the question of the suit being barred by limitation but
even then the suit was sent on remand to the Trial
Court for retrial.

5. Both the partics having felt aggrieved by the
appellate order came up in revision to the High Court
Division; CR 521 of 1988 at the instance of the plaintiff
and CR 593 of 1988 at the instance of the defendant.

6. A Single Judge of the High Court Division
agreed with the contention raised on behalf of the
defendant that the suit was clearly barred by limitation
inasmuch as the plaintiff's vendor admittcdly did not
file any suit for cancellation of the impugned
document dated 8.8.72 within three ycars from the date
Of his knowledge (February, 1975) about the said
(allegedly) fraudulent document and as such the right
to sue lapsed and it docs not revive after the plaintiff's
alleged purchase in 1980. The suit being barred, the
order of remand, it was held by the Icarned Judge, was
like asking the Trial Court to whip a dead horse which
would be an exercise in futility and the suit was
accordingly dismissed.

7. The petitioner prayed for Icave to appeal from
the judgment of the High Court Division by filing
CPLA Nos. 470 and 471 of 1989 which have since
been dismissed by the impugned order under review
dated 19 April 1990.

8. Mr. MH Khandkar, Icarned advocate for the
petitioner, has submitted with reference to the relicfs
prayed for in suit (quoted above) that the suit being
clearly a suit for declaration that the impugned
document was void which is governed under section
42 of the Specific Relicf Act and further rclicf as to
delivery and cancellation’ of the document being
merely auxiliary and not necessary to the granting of
the declaration as to voidness of the document, the
limitation for the suit will be governed by Article 120
(six years) and not by Article 91 (three ycars) of the
Limitation Act and thus a mistake or error apparent on
the face of the record has been made in the impugned
order by holding that, "thus the Icarned Single Judge
of the High Court Division rightly held that the suit
being barred by limitation the Court of appeal below
ought to have dismissed the suit altogether."

It is difficult to accept the contention of Mr.
Khandker, because, as far as cancellation of the
document was concerned, which appcars to be one of
the prayers of the plaintiff, there cannot be any
question that the suit will be governed by 3 (three)
ycars' limitation under Article 91 of the Limitation
Act. Even if we accept Mr. Khandker's contention that
six (6) years’ limitation will be applicable, the suit
will yct be barred because it has been found that the
plaintiffs’ vendor came to know about the impugned
document in February 1975 but the suit was filed on
22.11.83, long after 6 ycars. The fact that the plaintiff
came to know about the impugned document allegedly
on 24.12.80 when the same was produced by the
defendant in his eviction suit No. 55 of 1977 is not
material for the purpose of limitation inasmuch as his
vendor had knowledge of the said document since
February 1975. In any view of the matter, therefore,
the suit appcars to be barred by limitation. There is
thus no valid ground for review of the impugned order.

The petitions are, accordingly, dismissed.

Latifur Rahman J: While agrecing with the
order in the Review Pctitions given by my Icarned
brother ATM Afzal J, I would like to add few words on
the scope of review.


            
         

            10. The power of review of the judgment or
order of this Court is provided under Article 105 of the
Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.
Thus, the pertinent question that comes up for
consideration is, under what circumstances this
Division can review its own judgment and order once
the same has been disposed of on fact and law as well.

11. This case having been fully argued before us,
this Division by its judgment dated 19.4.90 found on
consideration of the materials on record that the finding
of the learned Single Judge of the High Court Division
that the suit was barred by limitation was correct.

12. Mr. MH Khandkar, Icarned Advocate's
argument in these Review Petitions amounts to
rehearing of the case on the question of limitation.

13. It may be pointed out that the scope of
review of our judgment is very limited. Review of a
judgment can be made where there is an error apparent
on the face of the record or that the attention of this
court was nol drawn to any particular statutory
provision of law for which an error has crept in the
judgment. It will be profitable to quote a passage from
a leave petition in the case of Sow Chandra Kanta and
another Vs. Sheik Habib reported in AIR 1975 (SC)
1500 where Krishna lyer, J. obscrved as follows:

"A review of a judgment is a scrious step and
reluctant resort to it is proper only where a glaring
omission or patent mistake or like grave error has
crept in carlier by judicial fallibility. A mere
repetition through different counsel of old and
overruled arguments, a sccond trip over
incffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of
inconsequential import are obviously insufficient.
The very strict need for compliance with these
factors is the rationale behind the insistence of
counsel's certificate which should not be a routine
affair or a habitual step."

14. This is the true scope of the review which
has been correctly enunciated by his Lordship of the
Supreme Court of India.

15. Before parting with this petition, it may be
mentioned that this Division possesses a special
power of revicw under the Constitution and that can at
times also be exerciscd to do full and effective justice
in a case. ,
Hence, the revicw pctilions are dismisscd.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Bakul Howlader @
MH Rahman J, ATM         | Shamsul Alam .....
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | ....Accused-Appellant
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
Judgment                 | The State...
May 20,1990.             | Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 498

High Court Division in criminal revision
cancelled the appellant's bail when there was no new
material before it and no allegation of tampering with
the evidence. Co-accused against whom cognizance of
a murder case has already been taken is already on bail,
High Court Division did not exercise its judicial
discretion properly in cancelling the appellant's
bail—appellants to remain on bail already granted by
Upazila Magistrate.

Serajul Haq with Dr. Kamal Hossain, Senior
Advocates, instructed by Mvi. Md. Wahidullah,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellant.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General instructed
by Md. Sajjadul Huq, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: This appcal by special
leave at the instance of accused Bakul Howlader @
Shamsul Alam is directed against the order by the
High Court Division, Dhaka in Criminal
Misccllancous Case No. 318 of 1989 with Suo Motu
Rule No. 451 of 1989.

2. The short fact that will be relevant for
disposal of this appcal is, that there was an altercation
between the supporters of two rival candidates in an
election for the office of the Chairman of Union
Parishad. One Bazlul Rashid Sarker was a candidate
for the post of Union Parishad Chairman and the rival


*Criminal Appeal No. 5 of 1990.

(From the judgment and order dated 19.2.1990
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Criminal
Miscellaneous Case No. 318 of 1989 with Criminal
Revision (Suo Motu) No. 451 of 1989).

|

            
            candidate was Shiraj Chowdhury. In that altercation
victim Motleb was killed by a gunshot injury at about
5.30 AM on 26.6.88. On the next day a First
Information Report was lodged by Mainuddin Faraji,
brother of the victim against 15 persons including the
present appellant Bakul Howlader. The primary
allegation in the First Information Report is that at
the order of Bazlur Rashid Sarker the present appellant
inflicted gunshot injury killing victim Mouleb. In that
case after investigation charge shect has already been
submitted by the Police on 4.8.88.

3. On the self-same incident another GD Entry
was recorded by Abdul Hashem, the maternal uncle of
deceased Motleb, alleging, inter alia, that Chunnu
Chowdhury and others.committcd the murder. On the
written complaint made before the Upazila Magistrate
on 11.12.88, the Upazila Magistrate took cognizance
in that case.

4. Thus, two cases on the self-same incident is
pending for trial. Meanwhile it appears that Mainuddin
Faraji, the brother of victim Motleb, disowned his
First Information Report by filing an affidavit before a
notary public stating that his signature was obtained
on a blank paper and subsequently this First
Information Report was fabricated:

5. A Division Bench of the High Court Division
while issuing Rule in Criminal Miscellaneous Case
No.318 of 1989 on an application for bail by accused
Bazlur Rashid Sarker also issued a suo motu Rule
being Criminal Miscellancous Case No.451 of 1989
to show cause as to why the bail granted to co-accused
Bakul Howlader should not be cancelled.

6. It appears that the Division Bench of the High
Court Division on consideration of the materials on
record held that Bazlur Rashid Sarker gave order
without having further overt act and in that view, the
Division Bench granted bail to Bazlur Rashid Sarker.
While disposing of the main Miscellancous casc, the
High Court Division cancelled the bail of co-accused
Bakul Howlader and made the connected suo motu
Rule absolute. .

7. Leave was granted to consider whether the —
learned Judges of the High Court Division acted
judicially in cancelling the bail of the appellant Bakul
Howlader when no new material was produced before
the court justifying such cancellation of bail. It
appears. in the present case that on the sclf-same
incident two First Information Reports have been

lodged and both the cases are pending. It also appears
that co-accused Chunnu Chowdhury against whom
cognizance has been taken in a case under section 392
of the Penal Code is already on bail. In view of
pending case and counter case, we are of the opinion
that the learned Judges of the High Court Division did
not exercise their judicial discretion properly in
cancelling the bail of the petitioner. The High Court
Division only considered the fact that in the First
Information Report lodged on 26.6.88 there is
allegation that appellant Bakul Howlader fired the
gunshot killing the victim. But in cancelling the bail
of the petitioner the Iearned Judges of the High Court
Division should have also considered the counter case
whercin positive allegation has been made stating that
Chunnu Chowdhury and others committed the murder.
Since the murder took place between the supporters of
two rival candidates in an clection, we are of the view
that the appellant Bakul Howlader should remain on
bail. Further, from the impugned order we do not also
find anything that there is any allegation of tampering
with the evidence and any new material has been
produced by the State justifying cancellation of the
bail in the facts and circumstances of the case. Thus,
we are of the view that the High Court Division did
not exercise its judicial discretion properly in
cancelling the bail of the appellant. Hence, the appeal
is allowed and the bail granted to the appellant by the
Upazila Magistrate is confirmed.

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Criminal)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Abdur Rahman Mondal
MH Rahman J, ATM         | and ors........ Appellants
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J |
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
Judgment                 | The State.....
July 23,1990.            | ....... Respondent*

Practice and Procedure

Re-trial—It_ was totally inexplicable why lessees
should be examined when no case was made out by the
prosecution that they were not available at trial for
giving evidence and not cited as witnesses in the
charge-sheet. It was incumbent upon the Appellate
Court below to dispose of the appeal on the basis of
the existing evidence on record. Order of remand for
retrial will cause prejudice to the accused appellants
which cannot be allowed.

Amirul Islam, Advocate instructed by Md. Aftab
Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellants.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by AW Mallik, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: The justification of an
order of the Appellate Court, upheld by the High
Court Division, remitting the case for re-trial upon
taking additional evidence is the question involved in
this appeal by special leave obtained by the
accused-appcllants,

2. A Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka in GR
Case No. 1470/88 by his judgment and order dated
6.9.89 convicted the accused-appellants under sections
447/379/427 of the Penal Code and sentenced
accused-appcllant No. 1 to suffer RI for one ycar 6
months and sentenced accused-appellant Nos. 2-3 to
suffer RI for 6 months each for their conviction under
section 379 of the Penal Code. No separate sentence
was passed for their conviction under sections 447/427

*Criminal Appeal No. 11 of 1990.

(From the Judgment and Order dated 21.1.90
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Criminal
Revision No. 83 of 1990).

of the Penal Code.

3. The prosecution case is that 0.05 acres of lang
of plot No. 702 of Rajarbag mouza appertaining {9
holding No. 99/C, Purba Bashabo Dhaka has been in
the possession of the informant PW 1 Major AK

Nurul Alam who obtained lease of the said land from

the Government in 1978 and has been possessing the
same for 17 years on erecting a tin hut thereon. On
9.5.88 at 7-30 PM the accused-appellants and others
committed illegal trespass into his land and dismantled
and took away the tin shed, causing a loss of about Tk.
10,000.00 The informant lodged a FIR to that effect
on 9.5.88 at Sabujbag PS leading to the institution of
the aforesaid GR Case.

4. The defence case is that the case land is an
enemy property and the appellants obtaincd a lease of
the same from the ADC, (Revenue), Dhaka on behalf
of Purba Bashabo Jano Kalyan Samity on 4.5.88 for
construction of a mosque. They have been falsely
implicated in the case.

5. The prosecution examined 6 witnesses and the
defence 2. Upon being convicted and sentenced as
aforesaid by the Trial Court the accused-appcllants
appeared and the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Ist Court, Dhaka by his judgment and order dated
20.11.89 in Criminal Appeal No. 349 of 1989 set
aside the order of the Ieamed Magistrate and remitted
the case for re-trial with an order to take additional
evidence. In Criminal Revision No. 83 of 1990 filed
by the accused-appellants the High Court Division by
its judgments and order dated 21.1.90 affirmed the
judgment and order of the Appellate Court. This
appeal has been taken from the aforesaid judgment of
the High Court Division.

6. Mr Amirul Islam, the learned Counsel for the
accused-appellants, has taken us through the judgment
of the Appellate Court. The learned Additional
Sessions Judge found that PW 1, the informant, was
not an eye-witness to the occurrence. PW 2 is a
labourer. PW 3 is an unemployed person. PW 4 has
filed a Criminal Case against appellant No. 2. PW 5
recorded the FIR and PW 6 is the IO of the case. DW |
an income-tax practitioner deposed that the ADC
(Revenue), Dhaka handed over possession of the cas¢
land to Purba Bashabo Jano Kalyan Samity where a
mosque has been established. DW 2 is the ‘District
Kanungo, Dhaka who deposed that PW 1 had no un
shed and had no possession of the case land. The
Appellate Court below held that moot question in this


            
            case is as to whether the appellants committed
trespass into the case land and took away tin of the
informant by force and thus committed an offence.
The case, according to him, depends upon the vital
finding as to whether the informant was in possession
of the case land at the material time. The Appellate
Court below opined that this finding is dependent
upon the outcome of Misccllaneous Case No. 97 of
1988 pending before the Additional Commissioner,
Dhaka Division in respect of Icase of the same case
land taken by both the informant and the accused
appellants. Additionally, the other co-sharcrs,
specially one Masood Anwar, who was not a witness
cited in the charge-shect but, who along with others
was given Icase of the land adjoining the case land, are
necessary witnesses for the purpose of deposing as to
whether the informant was in possession of the case
land at the matcrial time. The case was, thercfore,
remittcd to the Trial Court for re-trial upon taking
additional evidence.

7. Mr. Amirul Islam submits that from the
discussion of evidence by the Appellate Court below
the appellants were entitled to an order of acquittal as
the prosecution failed to prove its case. In the face of
such evidence on record, the order of re-trial mercly
furnishes an opportunity to the prosccution to plug
the holes of the prosccution case and to fill up the
lacuna. Mr Amirul Islam submits that re-trial under
such circumstances will only add to the harassment,
delay and expenses of the appellants and will be
extremely prejudicial to them. He submits that the
High Court Division has completely over looked this
aspect of the case.

8. Mr. B Hossain, learned Deputy
Alttorney-Gencral, appearing on behalf of the State,
submits that the State has no objection if the case is
sent back to the Appellate Court below for re-hearing
and disposal in accordance with law.

9. The summary of the Appcllate Court's
findings, as presented by Mr Amirul Islam, Icaves no
room for doubt that the order of re-trial was a
misconccived one. The outcome of the pending
Misccllancous Case No. 97 of 1988 cannot have any
bearing upon the factum of possession of the
informant in the case land. It was absolutcly
unwarranted to have deferred the decision of the case
till the disposal of the said miscellancous case. It was
also totally inexplicable why other Iessces like
Masood Anwar should be examined when no case was.


made out by the prosecution that they were not
available at the time of trial for giving evidence. As a
mattcr of fact Masood Anwar and other lessees were
not cited as witnesses in the charge-shect at all. Mr
Amirul Islam is right in submitting that this will be
giving a long rope to the prosecution to plug the holes
and to fill up the lacuna in the prosecution case.

10. It was incumbent upon the Appellate Court
below to dispose of the appeal this way or the other on
the basis of the existing evidence on record. The order
of remand for re-trial will cause prejudice to the
accused-appellants which cannot be allowed.

11. The appcal is, therefore, allowed. Tne
judgment and order of the High Court Division and
that of the lower Appellate Court are sct aside and the
appeal is remanded to the lower Appellate Court for
re-hearing and disposal on the basis of the existing
evidence on record in accordance with law.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Civil)
FKMA Munim CJ, Badrul  | Abul Quasem (Md)......
Haider Chowdhury J and | ......... Petitioner.
Shahabuddin Ahmed J.   | Vs.
Judgment               | Md. Lutfur Rahman ...
November 11, 1985      | .....Respondent.*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or.XXVI r.10

Commissioner's report is:to be evaluated in the
facts of the case on the evidence adduced and the Court
has wide discretion in such matter. Mere acceptance of
the report should not give rise to any apprehension in
the mind of the litigant.

Ashutosh and another Vs. RC Dey and others AIR
1953 Pat.133 relied.

Rafig-ul Iluq, Sr. Advocate with Md. Aminul
Huq, Advocate, instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader,

‘Advocate-on-Record—for the Petitioner.

SR Pal, Sr. Advocate, instructed by Kazi Ebadul
Toque, Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondent.



            
            Judgment

Badrul Haider Chowdhury J: In this
petition for special Icave the point for consideration is
the implication of report under Order 26, rule 10 of the
Civil Procedure Code.

2. Defendant is the petitioner. The
plaintiff-respondent filed a suit for declaration of title
and recovery of khas possession after demolishing the
construction made by the petitioner, confirmation of
possession in lot No. 1 of the suit propertics and for
permanent injunction.

3. On the prayer of the plaintiff, the learned
Subordinate Judge appointed two separate Advocate
commissioners to hold local investigation and local
inspection of the suit property. The writ that was
issucd by the Icarned Subordinate Judge was to the
following effect:

"To measure and relay CS Plot Nos. 178,
181 and 183 and ascertain the arca of plot Nos.
178 and 183 which have been allegedly
encroached by the defendant and also to ascertain .
CS Plot No. 181 as described in lot No. 1 of the
schedule of the plaint and prepare a map thercof."

4. The Trial Court also appointed an Advocate
to hold inspection of the suit land and issucd an order
to ascertain the exact location of the scplic tank,
sunshed and castern walls of the newly unfinished
construction of the defendant and the distance from the
boundary walls of the plainuff.

5. The learned Judge by his orders Nos. 39 and
40 dated 11.4.84 acccpted the reports of the
Commissioncrs. The defendant being aggrieved by the
acceptance of the Advocate Commissioner's report
moved the High Court Division in revision
contending that the Trial Court accepted the report
illegally inasmuch as the report was not in accordance
with the direction of the writ and the part of the report
of the Commissioner was unauthorised inasmuch as
the writ was not issucd to ascertain the arca of CS Plot
No. 181 by supcrimposition process with reference to
the RS Plot No. 99 and Plot No. 128 and the
statements in the report that the CS Plot No. 181
cover an area of 0.04394 acres of RS Plot No. 99 and
the said CS Plot does not cover any portion of RS
Plot No. 128.

6. The High Court Division took the view that

in revisional jurisdiction the court will not interfere
with the discretion of the Trial Court and pointed out

that the evidence of the Advocate Commissioner is
merely a piece of evidence in the suit and "it is for the
court in its finality to accept the same or reject" and in
this view of the matter discharged the rule.

7. Mr. Rafiqul Huq, learned Counscl, appearing
for the defendant-petitioner, placed before us Order
Nos. 39 and 40 and submitted that the Icarned
Subordinate Judge did not apply his judicial mind to
the objections raised by the defendant, which are even
admitted/conceded by the Commissioners in their
depositions. Mr. Huq contended that the Advocate
Commissioners did not try to find out trijunction
pillar and he took the north-west comer of the building
of CS Plot No. 392 as the fixed point without
measurement and survey of CS Plot No. 292; he did
not actually survey and measure CS Plot Nos. 178,
181 and 183 and the related RS Plots. The !carned
counsel placed before us the evidence of the Advocate
Commissioner and his cross examination. It was
argucd that in the state of such affairs the report should
not have been accepted by the Trial Court.

8. The argument is attractive, but if the terms of
Order 26, rule 10 of the Code are considered then it
docs not appear that there is reason for the defendant to
be apprchensive at this stage as the High Court
Division has correctly noticed that report of the
Commissioner and the evidence taken by him "shall
be evidence in the suit and shall form part of the
record,”

9. Sub-section (3) provides for further enquiry if
for any reason the court is dissatisficd with the
proceeding of the Commissioner, Mr. Huq, argued
that in the facts of this case the court should have
directed for further enquiry and the discretion that has -
been conferred is the judicial discretion and not vague
or fanciful discretion. In the facts of this case the Trial
Court ought to have directed further enquiry.

10. Rule 265 of the Civil Rules and orders
provide that the dutics of the Commissioner should be
strictly limited by the order to the points and he must
confine his enquiry to those points and report on them
only, without undertaking any other work at the
request of the partics,

Note I merits quotation :

"The proceedings should be drawn up under
the personal supervision of the presiding Judge
and should contain .a statement of the
Commissioners duties’ with precision and

            
            particularity, When boundaries have to be refixed
or maps have to be relaid, the description and
namcs of the maps or chittas to be used and the
particular work to be done in connection
therewith should be specifically Stated. Clear
directions should be given as to the starting point
of the inquiry. Commissioners should be
instructed that the work of survey shall, where
practicable, be connected with such permanent
marks as may cxist in the vicinity and that the
map prepared shall show the permanent marks,
the boundary of the disputed land, the boundaries
of adjacent lands so far as may be necessary and
the position of the settlement, revenue, that and
other survey lines if such position can be
determined with sufficient accuracy and such lines
are relevant to the dispute,"

11. While accepting the report the presiding
Judge is expected to keep the guiding lincs in view.

12. It is true that the acceptance of the report
may cause apprehension in the mind of the party, but
if the terms of Order 26, rule 10 of the Code are
analysed the fear disappears. The question of res
judicata docs not arise because this issue cannot be
said to be an issue in any former suit betwccn the same
parlics. In the case of Ashutosh and another Vs. RC
Dey and others reported in AIR 1953 Patna 133, a
Division Bench of the Patna High Court repelled the
contention by observing, it is not suggested that any
bar of res judicata is likely to rise by rcason of the
order of the court rejecting certain objections to the
Commissioncr's reports. The whole thing will be
decided at the suit because it is the evidence in the suit
and the defendant can adduce evidence in rebuttal and
when such evidence is given the court will evaluate
the whole thing in the light of the totality of the
evidence that have been adduced by the parties..[t was
observed,

"An order rejecting the objections and
confirming the report of the Commissioncr, does
not mean that the Court has: abdicated its
functions and had decided a fact in issue solely on
the report of the Commissioner and in advance of
or irrespective: of any. other relevant. cvidence
bearing on the. question.’ " (Ibid)

13. Iti is well ‘settled that the Court i is not at all
precluded. from considering the report of the
Commissioner afresh again in the light of such fresh
materials as may be legally een in‘the record by

the parties. The Patna High Court observed :

"It is obvious that when the Court rejects
certain objections to the Commissioner's report,
it is not precluded from examining the
Commissioner at a later stage either suo motu or
at the instance of any of the partics to the suit; nor
does the Court preclude itself from considering
the report of the Commissioner in the light of
such other evidence as may be given by the
partics to the suit."

14. We are in respectful agreement with this
proposition. In this view of the matter, the opinion is,
that the Commissioner's report is to be evaluated in
the facts of the case on the evidence adduced and the
Court has wide discretion in such matter. Mere
acceptance of the report should not give risc to any
apprehension in the mind of the litigant.

In the result, therefore, this petition is dismissed.
Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division) 

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Abdur Rabban (Md)......
MH Rahman J, ATM         | ween Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | Vs.
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Aminul Hoque Sowdagar
Judgment                 | and another.........
March 15,1990.           | Respondents*

Limitation Act (IX of 1908)
Articles 3 & 137

Limitation in a suit by a purchaser ata sale in
execution of decree when the judgment-debtor was out
of possession—Plaintiff, the auction purchaser, sued a
trespasser for recovery :sf possession—it was
incumbent upon the plaintiff to state in the plaint as
to when the defendant trespassed into the property. so,
that the latter could, set up his defence with. regard to
limitation andthe Trial Court, too, consistent with. its
independent obligation could decide whether the suit
was barred by limitation. wseee(10)

*Civil Appeal No. 70 of 1984.

(From the. Judgment and decree dated 13.2.84
passed by the High Court Division, Chittagong Bench
in Second Appeal No: 348 of 1976).

            
            Evidence Act (I of 1877)
Sections 17 & 145

Admission—Since the relationship of landlord
and tenant between the plaintiff and the defendant was
never a fact in issue, the application of the defendant
dated 121.66 (unconnected with the relationship) and
his deposition in a different proceeding could not be
admitted into evidence as an admission suggesting an
inference as to any fact in issue. The alleged
admissions were not set out in the plaint. Admission
can be explained and the maker of the same must have
an opportunity to explainthem, a, (10 & 12)

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. VI r. 17

Amendment of pleadings—Plaintiff filed an
application for amendment of the plaint that the
defendant entered into the property in 1956. The
application ought to have been allowed as it could
have been disposed of on the available evidence on
record and would not have prejudiced the defendant in
any manner.

—The defendant traces his: possession in the
property since 1948. Documentary evidence of
payment of rent starts from 1951. With the passage of
time, question of limitation and accrual of vested
Tights step in. The Court correctly rejected the
application for amendment of plaint. (14 & 15)

M Nurullah, Sr. Advocate, instructed by
Sharifuddin Chaklader Advocate-on-Record —For the
Appellant.

Syed Ishtiag Ahmed, Senior Advocate, instructed
by Shamsul Huque Siddique Advocate-on-Record —
For the Respondent No. 1.

Ex parte — Respondent No. 2.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: The plaintiff's appcal by
special Ieave is from the judgment and decree of a
learned Single Judge of the High Court Division,
Chittagong dated 13.2.84 in Second Appeal No.348 of
1976 dismissing the suit’ on sctling aside the
concurrent judgments and decrees passed by the Icarned
Additional District Judge, 2nd Court Chittagong in
Other Appeal No.292 of 1976 on 25.6.76 and by the
Icarned Subordinate Judge, 1st Court, Chittagong in
Title Suit No.18 of 1983 on 5.7.75, decrecing the suit.

2. The Suit was for declaration of title to the suit

land with 3 houses thercon, a town property at
Chittagong, with confirmation of possession of
Schedule A (southern portion) and recovery of
possession of Schedule B lands (northern portion),
Pro-forma defendant No.2 is the father of the plaintiff,
He supported the plaintiff's case by filing a written
statement. Defendant No.1 contested the suit by filing
a scparate wriltcn statement.

3. The plaintiff and defendant No. 1 agree that the
suit land originally belonged to Sarat Chandra
Majumder and that one Sm. Subhashini Singha
purchased the same on 13.2.47. The plainuff contends
that his father pro-forma defendant No. 2 was a
temporary monthly tcnant under Sarat Chandra
Majumder in a bamboo house lying on the westerm part
of Schedule A land. For arrears of rent one Haji Abdus
Samad instituted a Rent Suit in the Court of Munsif,
Satkania against Subhashini Singha with respect to
some land unconnected with the suit land and obtained
a decree thercin on 25.11.58. Having failed to execute
the decree by sale of the rent suit holding, Haji Abdus
Samad got the rent decree transferred from Satkania
Munsif's Court to the. Sadar Munsif Court,
Chittagong for execution against her other properties
at Chittagong. In exccution the plaintiff auction
purchased the present suit properties on 27.2.62,
obtained a sale certificate and also delivery of
possession on 18.5.62. The plaintiff is in possession
of the schedule property on payment of rents ctc. since
then. The plaintiff alleges that defendant No. 1 is a
trespasser and he had or has no right, title, interest and
lawful possession of the land and houses in suit.
Fabricating some rent-reccipts and putting a fictitious _
date of 23.7.51, the said defendant in collusion with
one Gul Muhammad represented to pro-forma
defendant No. 2 that he had interest in the suit houscs
and thereby managed to take by misrepresentation and
fraud an illegal and invalid agreement from pro-forma
defendant No.2 for the house which was in his
possession from before. Pro-forma defendant No. 2 has
in fact attorned to the plaintiff on 18.5.62. Defendant
No.1 obtained a decree of eviction on 28.8.62 against
pro-forma defendant No. 2 in an ejectment suit on false
and fraudulcnt allegations.

4. Defendant No. 1 contended that defendant No.
2 was not a tenant of Sarat Chandra or Subhashini.
One Gul Muhammad of West Pakistan came to
possess the suit land and houses by trespass without
the consent of Subhashini in 1984. He inducted
defendant No. 1 as a monthly tenant in the wholc of



            
            the suit land. Gul Muhammad possessed the suit
property through this defendant and on expiry of 12
years from 1984, Gul Mohammad became owner of
the suit property by adverse possession before 1962.
The plaintiff's auction purchase was a nullity. He did
not obtain any title as Subhashini's tide was already
extinguished in favour of Gul Mohammad. Nor did he
obtain any actual or symbolical possession of the suit
property. Defendant No. 2 was a tenant of defendant
No. 1 who has already obtained a decree for his
eviction from the tenantcd house. Defendant No. 2
cannot now resist ¢xcculion on the false story of
attornment to his own, son the plaintiff.

5. Both the trial Court and the first appellate
Court on an cxamination of the plaintiff's papers and
documents relating to the auction sale and the
litigations following therefrom came to hold that the
plaintiff acquired valid title to the suit property by
auction purchase. The two Courts below also held that
the plaintiff got formal delivery of posscssion. The
two Courts below considered a petition of defendant
No. 1 dated 12.1.66 in the suit itself whercin he stated
that Gul Mohammad obtained the suit propertics on
mortgage from Subhashini, and that defendant No. 1
attomced to Subhashini after the mortgage ducs of Gul
Mohammad were satisficd. A deposition by defendant
No. 1 in an another case (Misccllancous Casc No. 66
of 1963 arising out of OS No. 33 of 1966 filed by
plaintiff against Subhashini) was also noticed by the
Courts below. Defendant No. 1 stated therein that he
never denied the plaintiff's claim and that he was now a
tenant of the plaintiff in respect of the disputed house.
Both the Courts below held that the story of adverse
Possession sct up by defendant No. 1 was therefore a
myth. He himself acknowledged that he was now a
tenant under the plaintiff. The two Courts below
decreed the suit on declaration of the plaintiffs title to
the suit property confirming his posscssion in
Schedule A, and on declaration of his enutlcment to
possession of Schedule B land with defendant No. 1 as
tenant under him. Defendant No. 1 appealed. The
plaintiff was also not satisfied with the Trial Court's
decree of possession in Schedule B with defendant No.
1 as a tenant under him. He preferred an appeal
therefrom. The first appellate Court however
dismissed both the appcals of the plaintiff and
defendant No. 1. Thereafter defendant No. 1 took a
Second Appeal to the High Court Division and the
plaintiff filed a cross-objection, being sull aggricved
by the decree of possession in Schedule B land with
defendant No.1 as tenant under him.

6. The High Court Division sct aside the
concurrent judgments and decree of the Courts below,
and rejected the plaintiff's cross-objection. It held that
the plaintiff never entered into possession, actual and
symbolic, after his auction purchase. It being the
common case of both the parties that defendant No. 1
was a trespasser in the suit property, the High Court
Division held that the Courts below could not have
entertained any evidence to prove that defendant No. 1
was a tenant under Subhashini or under the plainuft.
Hence the finding that defendant No. 1 was a tenant
under the plaintiff cannot be sustained in law, Without
reversing the findings of the Courts below that the
plaintiff acquired valid title to the suit property by
auction purchase, the High Court Division held that
the plaintiff never took actual or symbolical
possession of the suit property at any time. The suit
was also barred by limitation under Article 137 of the
First Schedule to the Limitation Act as the plaintiff
had failed to allege in the plaint as to on which date
Subhashini the judgment-debtor had become first
entitled to possession. The plaintiff then filed an
application for amendment of the plaint stating that
defendant No. 1 entered into the suit property in 1956.
As the said application was filed 20 years after the date
of filing of the suit and about 27 years from the date of
the alleged entry, it was rejected by the High Court
Division.

7. Leave was granted to consider the question
whether the High Court Division acted in accordance
with law in allowing defendant No. 1 to agitate that no
evidence could be entertained on the relationship of
landlord and tenant between defendant No. 1 and either
Subhashini or the plaintiff, as no such ground was
taken specifically in the memorandum of second
appeal. Leave was also granted to consider whether the
rejection of the application for amendment of the
plaint was made on tenable grounds as the amendment
sought for could be decided on the evidence already on
record and it could not in any way change the nature
and character of the suit.

8. While arguing the casc, Mr. M Nurullah,
Icarned Counsel for the petitioner, did not press the
issuc of non-inclusion of ground in the memorandum
of appeal. He, however, submitted that the application
of defendant No. 1 dated 12.1.66 and his deposition in
Miscellancous Case No. 66 of 1963 ought to have
been taken into consideration by the High Court

            
            Division as admissions and should not have been
thrown out altogether as evidence outside of pleadings
and issues. Mr. Nurullah submits that these
Statements of defendant No. 1 were perfectly
admissible in evidence as admissions on his part as to
his relationship with Subhashini and the plainuff, and
are, therefore, good evidence in demolition of his case
of adverse possession.

9. An admission is defined in section 17 of the
Evidence Actas follows :—

"17. An admission is a statement, oral or
documentary, which suggests any inference as to
any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is
made by any of the persons, and under the
circumstances, hercinafter mentioned.”

10. It was the case of both sides that defendant No.
1 was a urespasser. The plaintiff, an auction purchaser,
sued defendant No. 1, a uespasser, for recovery of
possession of Schedule B property after evicting him
therefrom. It was incumbent upon the plaintiff to state
in the plaint as to when defendant No. 1 irespasscd into
the suit property, so that defendant No. 1 could sct up
his defence with regard to limitation and the trial Court,
100, consistent with its independent obligation under
section 3 of the Limitation Act, could decide whether
the suit was barred by limitation or not. The two Courts
below saved the suit for the plaintiff by giving a
gratuitous finding that defendant No. 1 was a tenant of
the plaintiff, a claim not made by the plaintiff himself
and a finding repeatedly appealed against by him.
Defendant No. 1 also never made this claim in the suit.
Since the relationship of landlord and tenant between
them was never the fact in issuc, the application of
defendant No. 1 dated 12.1.66 and the deposition of
defendant No. 1 in Miscellancous Case No. 66 of 1963
could not be admitted into evidence as an admission
suggesting an inference as to any fact in issuc.

11. But we can quite sce that the said application
and deposition could be admitted into evidence
Suggesting an inference as to a relevant fact for the
purpose of falsifying the claim of defendant No.1 that
Gul Mohammad acquircd title by adverse possession.
A tenant under a real owner cannot switch his loyalty
So often. But inclusion of this evidence as admission
is of no benefit to the plaintiff. He has not taken
possession of the suit property. He has not stated on
what date defendant No. 1 tespassed into the suit
property. Contradictory postures taken by defendant
No. 1 as regards acquisition of title by adverse
possession will not enure to the benefit of the Plaintite
at such stage of the suit.

12. There is one more hurdle, as Mr. Syeq
Ishtiaq Ahmed, Icarncd Counsel for the respondent
points out. The alleged admissions were not set oy i
the plaint. Admissions can be explained and the Maker
of the same must have an opportunity to explain
them. It was also necessary under section 145 of the
Evidence Act to draw the attention of defendant No.1,
dcposing as DW 1, to the relevant portions of the
application dated 12.1.66 and the deposition on which
reliance was sought to be placed by the plantiff was
also not cnough to prove the papcrs as a whole.
Specific portions containing the alleged admissions
ought to have been brought to the notice of the maker
thercof to enable him to make a reply or explain. That
has not been donc in this case.

13. The first submission of Mr. Nurullah fails.

14. On limitation Mr. Nurullah docs not
challenge the finding of the High Court Division that
Article 137 of the First Schedule to the Limitation
Act is applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
case. All he submits is that defendant No.1 has
himself led documentary evidence to show his
possession as a tenant of Gul Mohammad not earlier
than 1951. The suit was filed well within the period of
limitation of 12 ycars. The plaintiff filed an
application for an amendment of the plaint to the
effect that defendant No.1 entered into the suit
property in 1956. The application ought to have been
allowed as it could have been disposed of on the
available evidence on record and would not have
prejudiced defendant No.1 in any manner whatsoever
or changed the nature and character of the suit.

15. Defendant No.1 traces his possession in the
Suit property under Gul Mohammad since 1948.
Documentary evidence of payment of rent produced in
this suit starts from 1951, but he claims actual physical
possession from much earlier, in 1948. With passage of
time, question of limitation and accrual of vested rights
step in and the High Court Division correctly rejected
the application for amendment of plaint.

16. The last submission of Mr, Nurullah also bP:
fails,
 For the reasons stated above we do not find any ~
merit in the appeal. The appcal is dismissed but |
without any order as to costs. 

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,        | Absur Rouf Miah...
ATM Afzal J, Mustafa         | ..... Petitioner
Kamal J and Latifur Rahman J | Vs.
Judgment                     | Fazlur Rahman and ors..
June 27,1990.                | ....Respondents*

Union Parishad (Election) Rules, 1983
Rr. 38-41

Local Government (Union Parishads)
Ordinance (LI of 1983)

Election Commission's statutory power to
organise, conduct and hold fair and free election and to
direct fresh poll in appropriate cases—limit to this
power—this power is to be exercised subject to the
Election Rules.

No objection was raised to any of the Presiding Officers
to his counting the ballot papers, nor was any prayer for
re-counting made to him, and he in usual course recorded the
result of counting in the appropriate form and forwarded it to
the Returning Officer who consolidated the results and

declared Respondent No. 10 duly elected. Before
consolidation of the results no objection was raised to the
Retuming Officer. Objection was raised to him, then to the
Election Commission, after the declaration of election
result—In such circumstances the Election Commission
should not have directed re-counting without hearing both
-the parties. In course of re-counting, some ballot papers in
:Tespect of 4 centres were found missing. Elected candidate
_alleged that it was a post-clection mischief at the instance of
the defeated candidate. Such a question cannot be determined
except on evidence, a function of the Tribunal and not of the
Election Commission, = sveaeee (4 & 6)
Dr. Kamal Hossain, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, (Rabeya Bhuiyan, Advocate, Supreme Court,
with him) instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader,
“Advocate-on-Record— For the Petitioner. °

Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, advocate-on-Record —
For Respondent. No.1

‘Not represented — Respondent, Nos. 2-11.

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No: 152 of
1990.
(From the judgment and order dated 24.5.90
Passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka, in Writ
Petition No, 894 of 1990). .

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: Petitioner, a
contesting candidate for the office of Gaibandha
Upazila Parishad, challenged, by Writ Petition No.
849 of 1990, the Elcction Commission's order
refusing to hold repoll in 4 out of 87 Centres, (polling
stations) but the Icarned judges, after hearing the
parties, dismissed the petition and discharged the rule
issued thereupon carlier. He is now seeking leave to
appeal from that order of the High Court Division,
dated 24 May 1990.

2. Election was held in 87 Centres on 18 March
1990 and 7 candidates including the petitioner and
respondent No. 10 contested the election. On
conclusion of election in all the Centres the Presiding
Officers counted ballot papers of their respective
Centres on the spot in presence of the candidates, and
recorded the results in the prescribed Form and
forwarded the same in scaled bags to the Returning
Officer. The latter on receiving the results from all the
Centres consolidated the results and declared
respondent No. 10 duly elected Chairman on 21.3.90..
The Returning Officer then, by an order dated 27
March 1990, forwarded the name of the elected
candidate to the Election Commission for publication
in the official Gazcttc; but on that day, the petitioner
filed an application before the Election Commission
bringing some allegations and praying for re-counung
of the ballot papers. The Chicf Election
Commissioner thereupon directed the Returning
Officer to re-open the ballot boxes and recount the
ballot papers in presence of the parties. Accordingly,
the Returning Officer opened the ballot boxes and
recountcd the ballot papers. He found no discrepancy
in the ballot papers of 83 Centres; but in respect of 4
Centres, he found marks of tampering and a
substantial number of ballot papers missing. In this
position he did not complete the re-counting but
submitted a report to the Chief Election
Commissioner, In the meantime, respondent No. 10
filed an objection to the Election Commissioner's
order for re-counting the ballot papers alleging that in
the absence of any complaint whatever to the
Presiding Officer or even to the Returning Officer
before the consolidation and declaration of the result,
there was'no scope for the Election Commissioner for
re-counting. The Election Commissioner then vacatcd
his order for rc-counting, accepted the election of
Respondent No. 10, as declared by the Returning


            
            Officer, and got it published in the official Gazette on
19 April 1990, observing that in the 4 disputed
Centres where tampering of ballot papers was found
he could not direct re-poll, because Rule 68 of the
Upazila Parishad (Election) Rules 1983 had been
repealed. The petitioner in his Writ Petition contended
that the Chief Election Commissioner's plenary
power to direct re-poll was not affected by repeal of
Rule 68. But the Icarned judges did not accept this
contention and observed that the plenary power of the
Election Commission for ordering re-poll was not
available in a peaccful and normal election,
particularly when no objection was taken before the
Presiding Officer and no prayer was made to him for
re-count on the spot.

3. Dr. Kamal Hossain, learned Counsel for the
pelitioner, has assailed the High Court Division's
view and contended that when ballot papers of 4
Cents were found tampered with it was.a clear case
for re-poll in these Centres and that the Election
Commission failed to exercise its power and
jurisdiction to direct re-poll in order to ensure a fair and
free election.

4. There can hardly be any dispute that the
Election Commission got statutory power to
organise, conduct and hold election which must be fair
and free and to direct fresh poll in appropriate cases.
But this power is to be exercised subjcct to the
Election Rules. In this case there was no complaint
whatever before the Presiding Officers as to any unfair
practice adopted by any partly nor was any petition
made to the Presiding Officers for re-counting of
ballot papers on the spot, and conscqucntly the
Presiding Officers, in usual course, recorded the result
of counting of ballot papers in the appropriate Form
and forwarded the samc in scaled bags to the Returning
Officer. Duty of the Returning Officer, unless he got
report or information as to disruption of the election
or large scale rigging in any Centre, is just to
consolidate the results received from the Presiding
Officers and declare elected the candidate who has
received the highest number of votes. The next course
for him is to send the name of the elected person to the
Election Commission for notifying the election in the
Official Gazctte. If these duties are performed in due
and normal course there is no scope for the Election
Commission to intervene, After the Notification any
dispute regarding election is to be brought to the
Tribunal for determination.

5. But on many occasions untoward things may
happen, such as, capturing the polling booth by
musclemen, driving away the Presiding Officers Or
agents of the rival candidates and then Stuffing the
ballot boxes with ballot papers and then obtaining g
favourable result-sheet from the Presiding Officer,
cither by coercion or by purchasing his honesty, Ip
such circumstances, the Election Commission has
got power to ignore the election result submitted by
the Presiding Officer and direct fresh poll. Again, even
if poll had becn taken in a peaceful manner, but the
Presiding Officer being influenced by a candidate
wrongly counted the ballot papers in favour of 4
candidate, and if re-counting is prayed for on the spot
but is refused, the Election Commission may
intervene.

6. But in this case no objection was raised to
any of the Presiding Officers to his counting the
ballot papers, nor was any prayer for re-counting made
to him, and he, in usual course, recorded the result of
counting in the appropriate form and forwardcd it to
the Returning Officer. The latter consolidated the
results and declared Respondent No. 10 duly elected.
Before consolidation of the results no objection was
raised to the Returning Officer; but objection was
raiscd to him and then to the Election Commission
after the declaration was made. In such circumstances
the Election Commission should not have directed
re-counting without hearing both the parties. In the
course of re-counting, some ballot papers in respect of
4 Centres were found missing, The pertinent question
is who had done it and when? According to the elected
candidate it was a post-election mischief at the
instance of the defeated candidate or candidates. This is
a question which cannot be determined except by
recording evidence, given on oath. This is a job of the
Tribunal and not of the Election Commission. The
view of the Chicf Election Commissioner that he Is
powerless to do anything in the absence of Rule 68 1S
not correct. The Election Commission has got power
and jurisdiction to organise, hold and conduct election
and it is also his duty to sce that election is held in 4
fair and honest manner. But he is also subject to the
Election Rules. Subject to this observation the
pelition is dismissed:

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Wajear Rahman Moral
MH Rahman J, ATM      | (Md)......Appellant
Afzal J and Mustafa   |
Kamal J.              | Vs.
Judgment              | The State.....
August 20,1990.       | .....Respondent*

Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 137

Statements elicited from a witness in
cross-examination are a very important part of
evidence before a Court. Before drawing any inference
from the testimony of a witness, the Court must
consider the statements made in the
examination-in-chief and those made in
cross-examination by putting them in juxtaposition
and see whether that witness has stood the test. ....(7)

Criminal Trial

Death sentence, commutation of—Death
sentence not executed after more than four years from
the date of confirmation of the sentence. Appellant

suffered a prolonged agony for laches of others. Death
sentence commuted to one of life imprisonment,

MA Wahab Miah, Advocate, Supreme Court—
For the Appellant.

B Hossain Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent.

Judgment

MH Rahman J: This Jail appeal by the
condemned prisoner is directed against the judgment
and order dated 10th and 11th August, 1986, of the
High Court Division, Jessore Bench confirming the
Sentence of death passed against the appcllant under
Section 302 of the Penal Code by the Additional
Sessions Judge, Second Court, Jessore on 9.6.1983 in
Sessions Case No. 22 of 1978.

2. On 16.10. 1976. PW 1 Md. ei hemoned

*Jail Appeal No. 1 of 1990.

(From the judgment and order dated Joth and
11th August, 1986 passed by the High Court Division,
Jessore Bench in Death Reference No. 11 of 1983
with vl Appeal No, 109 of (eee)

Ahmed lodged an information at Police Station
Keshabpur, Jessore, alleging, inter alia, that in the
night following 15.10.1976 Swarup Moral after
taking meal was sleeping with his second wife in the
southern verandha of his east bhiti hut, and his first
wife was sleeping inside the hut along with her
children; that at about 11.30 PM hearing hue and cry
PW 1 went to the house of Swarup and found him
with his throat cut and he could not talk at that time;
that the victim died before the arrival of the local
doctor Raushan; that on qucry the two wives of
Swarup told the informant they did not see anybody,
but in the previous night an unknown man came to
their house and talked with their husband and they
came to know from the village people that his name
was Waziar. The wives suspected Waziar for the death
of Swarup Moral who had a dispute with his step
brother-in-law Yasin over the land belonging to his
mother-in-law, the mother of his first wife. PW 1
suspected that his step brother-in-law got Swarup
killed by the said Waziar and others.

3. Waziar, the appellant before us, and Yasin
were charged under section 302/34 of the Penal Code.
The prosecution examined 15 witnesses. PW 8 was
tendered for cross-examination. PWs 6,7 and 14 were
declared hostile. The defence did not adduce any
evidence. It was suggested that PW 1 wanted to grab
Swarup Moral’s homestead, his first wife's mother's
property, by getting Yasin incarcerated.

4. On 8.3.90 the appellant filed a petition for
leave to appeal to this Court from Jail. Considering
the appellant's contentions that the High Court
Division, in confirming the sentence of death did not
at all consider the statements of PW 2 Taraban and
other witnesses that were made in cross examination
and that four years had already elapsed after the
confirmation of the death sentence, but the sentence
was not executed, leave was granted on condonation of
delay.

5. The Icarned Counsel for the appellant —
contends that the trial Court as well as the appellate
Court didnot take into consideration significant
contradictions between PW 1's deposition in court and
his statements made in the FIR. In the FIR PW 1
stated that on being asked the two wives of the victim
stated that they did not see anybody, but they
suspected Waziar might have committed the murder
but before Court he stated that PW 2, the younger
wife of the victim, told him that Waziar and Yasin

            
            murdered her husband as Yasin had a land dispute with
her husband.

6. It is also contended that alleged eye-witness,
PW 2, is also not a witness of truth. She Stated in her
examination-in-chief that after hearing sound she
woke up and found accused Waziar beside her husband
with a torch light. Waziar focussed the torch and dealt
a dao blow on the neck of her husband and then ran out
of the hut. PW 2 told PW 1 Moyezuddin who came to
the victim's house soon after the occurrence that
Waziar and Yasin murdered her husband. She also told
her co-wife PW 6 that she recognised Waziar. This
witness however contradicted hersclf in
cross-cxamination by saying that she woke up when
warm blood fell on her body. She then called her
co-wife to light a lamp and she lighted a lamp. She did
not sce Waziar with the light of the lamp. She
recognised him with the light of his torch. The light
of torch feli on her face. She told PW 1 that she
recognised Waziar with the light of torch. At first she
denied that she told PW 1 and others that she could not
recognise anybody, but in the next breath she said that
she did not tell PW 1 Moyezuddin when he went to the
police station about her recognition of Waziar and that
she told him that she did not sce anybody. Without
considering the vital omissions in the evidence of PW
1, the informant, and the glaring contradictions in the
evidence of PW 2, the only eye-witness, the Trial
Court and the High Court Division uncritically
accepted their evidence.

7. Statements clicited from a witness in cross
examination, the most effective of all means ever
invented for the discovery of truth and exposing
falsehood, are a part, a very important part, of evidence
before Court. Before drawing any inference from the
testimony of a witness the Court, particularly the
Trial Court, must consider the statements made in
chief and those made in cross by putting them in
juxtaposition and sce whether that witness has stood
the test or supplied his own refutation.

8. Had the prosecution case been based solely on
the ocular evidence then we would have acquitted the
appellant, We, however, find it difficult to acquit the
appellant in view of his clear and straight-forward
confession and other evidence on record. PW 13 ASM
Mobaidul Khan, Magistrate, First Class recorded his
confession and he did not find any mark of injury on
the person of cither of the two accused. He stated that
both. the accused voluntarily confessed. Waziar's

confession: His maternal father-in-law Yasin
promised to pay him Tk. 600.00 if he could get some
one to kill his step brother-in-law Sharitullah with
whom he had some land dispute. Waziar engaged one
who was in jail custody. He took Tk.200.00 as
advance from Yasin for getting that man bailed out
from jail. Before the job could be performed that man
got involved in another case. Yasin asked for the
return of the money and insisted that some body
should be engaged to kill Sharitullah. Because of his
inability to return the money and also for his lust for
the lucre, the remainder of the promised money,
Waziar went to the house of Sharitullah in the night
of the occurrence and finding him sleeping in the open
verandha of his dwelling hut with his second wife he
gave a dao blow on his throat and ran away. Later he
came to know that Sharitullah had died. The
co-accused also confessed in the some vein. PW ]
stated that Shariatullah Moral was Swarup Moral's
another name. Yasin was acquitted from the Trail
Court on the ground that he was implicated out of
suspicion only as he had enmity with the deceased's
mother-in-law and that there was no corroboration that
the murder was committed at his instance. The
prosecution did not file any appeal against the order of
acquittal with regard to Yasin.

9. The Trail Court as well as Appellate Court
noted that the accused Waziar retracted his confession.
We do not find any paper in this regard. On Waziar's
application for bail on 20.2.1981 the Committing
Court made the following observation:

"It appears that the petitioner made a
statement u/s. 164 CrPC and admitted that he
committed the offence, But when the charge had
been read over to him he pleadcd not guilty. This
shows that the petitioner retracted from the
statement he made carlier."

It is not clear whether this observation was the
basis for the inference that the accused retracted his
confession.

10. In any case, in the facts of the case that
confession cannot be ignored. The occurrence took
place at 11.30 PM on 15.10.1976. Yasin was arrested
on 17.10.1976 and Waziar was arrested on
18.10.1976. On 19.10.1976 PW 13, Magistrate, First
Class, recorded the confession of the two accused
under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
There was hardly any discrepancy in the twO
confessional statements. After scrutinizing the

            
            confessions Closely, we have got no doubt in our mind
that they were made voluntarily and the statements
were truc. Waziar's name was disclosed in the First
Information Report. The evidence of informant PW 1
and of the alleged cyc-witness PW 2 Taraban are not
themselves satisfactory for upholding an order of
conviction, PW 2's claim of recognition of the
accused is doubtful. But the fact remains that soon
after the occurrence PW 2 expressed her suspicion
before PW 1 the informant and her co-wife PW 3 that
Waziar might be the assailant, PW 2's suspicion, the
appellant's confession, the evidence of PWs 5 and 6
who saw Waziar on the way carrying something and
the doctor's evidence as to the incised wound on the
fsont of the deceased's neck proves beyond reasonable
doubt that the appellant was the assailant, there being
no worthwhile reason for false implication,

11. The learned Counsel for the appellant cited
Sheikh Ahmed Vs, The State 3, BSCR 417 in support
of his contention that the learned judges of the High
Court Division erred in law in referring to the
confession of the co-accused.

In that case it was held:

"Section 30 by itself does not need any
corroboration but by using the rule of prudence it
is now an accepted principle that there should be
corroborative circumstances. In the present case
the corroborative circumstances to convict
appellant Sheikh Ahmed under section 302 has
been supplied by the existence of the punctured
injury on the neck of the deceased, However, we
need not dilate on this question in view of the
clear finding of the High Court Division that the
appellant Sheikh Ahmed stood condemncd by his
confessional statement which had been found to
be voluntary and truc. From the evidence it
appears that the charge under section 302 against
appellant Sheikh Ahmed has been satisfactorily
proved and he has been rightly conve
thereunder."

This decision rather goes to support the
Prosecution.

12. Lastly the learned Counsel for the appellant
has fervently urged, though no Icave was granted on
the point, that in this case the accused had been
prejudiced for not being examined at all under section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

13. It appears from the record that.after being
released on bail the appellant did not appear before
court from 22,6,62 to 20,5.63. Considering the
appellant's absence as absconsion the court thought it
was unnecessary to split the case from that of the
co-accused Yasin, On 22.5,83 the co-accused Yasin
was examined under section 342 of the Code. After
hearing both sides the Trial Court fixed 30.5.83 for
delivery of judgment, On that date the Court at first
noted that" Accused Waziar is absconding. Judgment
in not ready. To 9.6.83 for delivery of judgement”. In
the next sentence it was, however, written:

"It has come to the notice of the court that
the accused Waziar is in the custody of central
jail, Jessore in another case. Issue production
warrant against accused Waziar.”

14. On 9.6.83 when both the accused were
produced from custody Waziar was examincd under
section 265 K(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
and he mercly begged mercy of the Court. He did not
challenge the prosecution case or asserted that his
confession was extorted from him nor any prayer was
made cither for recalling PWs. 15 and 16 who had
been examined in his absence or for his examination
under section 342 of the Code. Neither in his
memorandum of appeal nor in his petition for special
Icave to appeal against the High Court Division's
order of conviction and sentence the appellant took
any plca that his confession was extorted by coercion
or threat or that he was materially prejudiced for not
being examined under section 342 of the Code. He
mercly stated that he was falscly implicated and that
he was convicted on Bae evidence of untruthful
wilnesscs,

15. ‘In the facts of the case we, therefore, uphold
the order of conviction. In view of the peculiar
circumstances of the case where the death sentence has
not been executed after more than four years from the
date. of confirmation. of the sentence by the High ,
Court Division and the appellant has suffered a
prolonged agony for laches of others we commute the
sentence of death to onc‘of life imprisonment.

In the result, the appcal is dismissed with the
modification of sentence, that is, the sentence of death

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)

Shahabuddin      | Ishaque (Md) and others........
Ahmed CJ,MH      | ...... Appellants
Rahman J, ATM    | Vs.
Afzal J, Mustafa | The Government of Bangladesh
Kamal J & Latifur|...... Res-
Rahman J.        |  pondent in CA No, 13/90*
                 | Md. Ishaque........ Appellant
Judgment 	     | Vs. 
June 25, 1990    | The Government of Bangladesh
		     | represented by the Land
		     | Acquisition Collector, Dhaka..
    		     | .... Res-
		     | pondent in CA No, 14/90*
		     | Abdur Rob... Appellant
		     | Vs.
		     | Iqbal Hossain and others.........
		     | ..... Res-
		     | pondents in CA No, 15/90**

Limitation Act (IX of 1908

Secs. 5 and 29 (2)

EB (Emergency) Requisition of Property
Act. (XIII of 1948)

Sec. 7(f)

EB (Emergency) Requisition of Property
Rules, 1948

Rule 9(6)

By Majority : Appeal against final award before
the High Court Division—Appellate Court is not
- empowered to condone the delay of time-barred appeals
under sec, 5 of the Limitation Act in view of clear
provision of sec, 29(2) which excludes application of
sec, 5, ‘

Kaushalya Rani VS, Gopal Singh, AIR 1964 SC 260;
Mangu Ram Vs, Delhi Municipality, AIR 1976 SC,
105-ref..

*Civil Appeal Nos! 13 and 14 of 1990
(From the Judgment and order dated 27.8,86
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Appeal
from Original Order No. 239 of 1986 and 240 of 1986),
with
**Civil Appeal No. 15 of 1990
_ (From the Judgment and order dated 11.1,1990
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Civil
Revision No, 1089 of 1989),

Local Government (Union Parishads)
Ordinance (LI of 1983)
Sec. 29 (4)

Appellate Election Tribunal admitting 4
memorandum of appeal by condoning the delay in itg
filing under sec. 5 of the Limitation Act—Election
Tribunal's judgment was announced on a later day byt
it was signed earlier—Application of sec. 5 of the
Limitation Act is subject to determination of the
actual date of announcement of the Election Tribunal's
judgment.

Miah Abdul Gafur, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Appellants in CA Nos. 13 and 14 of 1990,

Khondkar Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior
Advocate (SS Halder, Senior Advocate with him),
instructed by Ranesh Chandra Maitra
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellant in CA No,
15 of 1990,

Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan, Additional
Attorney-General instructed by B Hossain,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondents in CA
Nos. 13 and 14 of 1990.

TH Khan Senior Advocate (MA Wahhab Miah
Advocate with him) instructed by Mvi. Md.
Wahidullah Advocate-on-Record—For the
Respondent No,] in CA No, 15 of 1990.

Not Represented — Respondent Nos. 2-14 in CA
No, 15 of 1990,

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J : These three appeals by
special leave are disposed of by this judgment as
common questions of law are involved in all these
appeals,

2. Civil Appeal Nos. 13 and 14 of 1990 relate to
filing of two Miscellaneous Appeals against two
awards passed by the 4th Subordinate Judge and
Arbitrator, Dhaka in Land Acquisition cases under the
Emergency Requisition of Property Act, 1948,

3. The relevant facts of these two appeals, are
that the appellants’ lands were acquired by the
Government under the Emergency Requisition of
Property Act, 1948, The appellants being dissatisfied
with the compensation assessed, filed arbitration cases
before the 4th Subordinate Judge and Arbitrator,
Dhaka and accordingly final awards were passed.

            
            Against those awards, the respondent-Government
preferred two Misccllancous Appeals before the High
Court Division under section 7(f) of the Emergency
Requisition of Property Act, 1948 read with Rule 9
(16) of the Rules, 1948 which prescribes a period of
60 days in filing such appeal. Admittcdly the appeals
were barred by 48 days and the Icarned Judges of the
High Court Division condoned the delay under section
5 of the Limitation Act,

4. The Icgal questions that have been raised in
civil Appeal Nos. 13 and 14 of 1990 relating to
applicability of section 5 of the Limitation Act in
view of sub-section 2 of section 29 of the Limitation
Actare to be considered hercin below,

5. A plain reading of sub-section (2) of scction
29 of the Limitation Act shows in specific words that
when a special or local law prescribes a period of
limitation for filing suit, appeal or application
different from the period prescribed thercof by the First
Schedule of the said Act, the provisions contained in
section 4, scctions 9-18 and section 22 will apply.
Thus it is clear that scction 5 is excluded and it does
not empower a Court to condone the delay under
section 5 of the Limitation Act. Similar vicw has also
been expressed in the case of Kaushalya Rani Vs.
Gopal Singh, reported in AIR 1964 SC 260 and in
many other decisions of the High Court Division of
this Court relating to special or local law which
prescribes a special limitation, It may be mentioned
that in India Limitation Act was amended by
Limitation Act (1963), whercin section 5 has been
made specifically applicable by section 29,
sub-section 2 of the Limitation Act, Thus, in India it
now stands that an application under section 5 of the
Limitation Act is applicable after 1963 in case of
special or local law, if the applicant can satisfy the
Court that he was prevented by sufficient cause in
Presenting the application within the period prescribed
under a special or local law, In the case of Mangu Ram
Vs, Delhi Municipality, reported in AIR 1976
Supreme Court 105, the position of law in this regard
before and after amendment of section 29(2) of the

Limitation Act has been clearly noticed,

6. In Bangladesh there has been no amendment
of the Limitation Act extending the scope of section 5
Of the Limitation Act to special or local law which
Prescribes a different period of limitation as provided
under Schedule 1 of the Limitation Act, Whether
Section 5 of the Limitation Act will apply in the case

of special or local law is a matter for the Icgislature to
decide. If the Icgislature thinks that such amendment
is necessary for the benefit of the people giving
opportunitics to avail of the benefit of section 5 of the
Limitation Act in presentation of any suit, appcal or
application in respect of any Special or Local law,
then the law making authority may consider this
aspect kecping in view the bencficial purpose of
legislation. As law of limitation stands today, it is
undisputed that a plain reading of sub-scction 2 of
section 29 clearly shows that scction 5 has no
application in the present cases. Thus, the High Court
Division acted without jurisdiction in condoning the
delay in these cases.

7. Before parting with these cascs it may be
mentioned that the Icarned Additional Attorncy-
General appearing for the respondent-Government
submittcd that the appeal though time barred could be
considered as the decision on the face of it is a nullity.
In the present cases, the argument as advanced by the
learned Additional Attorncy-Gencral could not be
considered because this point was not raised and
agitated before the courts below. However, in an
appropriate case the question of nullity can be
considered on merits even in a time barred appeal.

8. Civil Appeal No. 15 of 1990 arises out of a
judgment of the High Court Division in Civil
Revision relating to admission of an appeal by the
Appellate Election Tribunal, Dhaka condoning the
delay in filling the appeal under ‘section 5 of the
Limitation Act.

9. The material fact of this appeal, is that, the
appellant was declared elected as Chairman in the
Election of Siddirganj Union. Parishad held on
10,2,88, Respondent No. 1 challenged the aforesaid
election by filing an election petition and the Election
Tribunal allowed the election petition, On appeal by
the appellant, the Appellate Election Tribunal
admitted the appeal by condoning the delay of 13 days
in filing this appeal under section 5 of the Limitation
Act. This order of condonation of delay was
challenged in Revision on the ground, that the
Election law is a special statute and sub-section 4 of
section 29 of the Local Government (Union
Parishads) Ordinance 1983 provides for 30 days’ time
for filing such appeal from the date of announcement
of the decision,

10. The learned single Judge of the High Court
Division on consideration of sub-section 2 of section

            
            29 of the Limitation Act held that election law which
is a special statute provides a special period of
limitation and section 5 of the Limitation Act will
have no application in the present case. But in view of
the contentions raised by the appellant in the
application for condonation of delay under section 5 of
the Limitation Act and by filing two affidavits sworn
by appellant's Advocate and clerk, that the judgment
was announced on a later day whereas it was signed
earlicr by the Election Tribunal, the learned single
Judge of the High Court Division sct aside the
impugned order of admission of the appeal and directed
the Appellate Election Tribunal to decide the
application for condonation of delay by issuing
notices upon the partics concerned and then hold due
enquiry on which date the Election Tribunal
announccd its decision in the case. The leamed single
Judge after duc consideration of the law held that if the
Memo of appeal was filed within 30 days from the date
of actual announcement of the decision of the Election
Tribunal, then the Appellate Court will admit this
appcal and if the Memo of appeal was filed beyond 30
days from the date of announcement of the judgment
of the Tribunal, the memo of appeal shall be
dismissed as barred by limitation. This decision by the
learned single Judge of the High Court Division calls
for no interference, as application of section 5 of the
Limitation Act is subject to determination of the
actual date of announcement of the judgment.

11. Consequently, Civil Appeal Nos. 13 and 14
of 1990 are allowed and Civil Appeal No. 15 of 1990
is dismissed. There will be no costs in any of these
appeals.

ATM Afzal J : I have gone through the
judgments prepared by my brothers Mustafa Kamal J
and Latifur Rahman J. I agree with their decision and
wish to add few comments of my own.

13. Leave was granted to consider whether the
application of section 5 of the Limitation Act 1908 is
excluded by reason of section 29(2)(b) of the said Act
in determining the period of limitation for an appeal
under a special law prescribing a period of limitation
different from the period prescribed thereof by the first
schedule of the said Act. In CA 13 and 14 of 1990, the
High Court Division condoned the delay of the
Government in filling appeals under section 7(f of the
(Emergency) Requisition of Property Act, 1948. In
CA 15 of 1990 a Single Judge of the High Court

Division by a considered judgment in revision set

aside the order of the Appellate Election Tribung|
Narayanganj condoning the delay in filing the appeal
under sub-section (4) of section 29 of the Local
Government (Election Parishads) Ordinance, 1983.
The Iearmed Single Judge held : "From a consideration
of all the above decisions and the provisions of
section 29 of the Limitation Act 1908, it, therefore,
emerges that section 5 of the Limitation Act has been
completely excluded from application in case of
limitation prescribed by any spccial or local law by
operation of Clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section
29 of the Limitation Act."

14. The learned Additional Attorney-General
appearing for the respondent Government in CA 13
and 14/90 did not advance any argument supporting
the application of section 5 of the Limitation Act to
the appeal under consideration, rather he pointed out -
fairly that in India the law was scttled (until
amendment of section 29 in 1963) by the Supreme
Court that section 5 docs not apply to such cascs. In
Kaushalya Rani Vs. Gopal Singh AIR 1964 SC 260
the question arose, because of considerable conflict of
opinion in the various High Courts, whether the
provisions of section 5 of the Limitation Act apply to
an application for special Icave to appeal from an order
of acquittal under sub-section (3) of section 417 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, sub-section (4) thereof
providing for a special law of limitation. The answer
given was in the negative. In the case of Mangu Ram
Vs. Delhi Municipality AIR 1976 SC 105 Bhagwati J
considering a similar question after the promulgation
of the Limitation Act of 1963 ‘by which scction 29
sub-section (2) was amended and section 5 was made
applicable to appeal, etc. under a special or local law
observed with reference to the aforesaid case (AIR
1964 SC 260) that “Now, there can be no doubt that if
the present case were governed by the Indian
Limitation Act, 1908, this decision would wholly
apply and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi would
not be entitled to invoke the aid of section 5 of that
Act for the purpose of extending the period of
limitation of sixty days prescribed in sub-scc.(4) of
section 417 for an application by a complainant for
special leave to appeal against an order of acquittal.
But the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 has clearly n0
application in the present case, since that Act !S
repealed by the Limitation Act, 1963 which came into
force with effect from Ist January, 1964 and the
present case must, therefore, be decided by reference [0
the provisions of Limitation Act, 1963.

            
            15. Mr. Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Icarned Advocate
for the appellant in CA 15/90, while arguing in favour
of the application of section 5 did not cite any
authority in support nor made any comment on the
judgment of the High Court Division in which a
number of decisions were considered including the two
cited by him. His main argument was that for section
29(2) to be attracted, a special law must provide for a
period of limitation which is literally and in terms
different from the period prescribed thereof by the first
schedule. This argument was also not supported by
any authority, rather he frankly pointed out that the
argument did not find favour with the Indian Supreme
Court vide AIR 1964 SC 260.

16. Indeed no decision supporting the
application of section 5 could be cited from our own
Jurisdiction since the days of the Dhaka High Court
except that in Mustafa @ Mustafizur Rahman Ys. The
State 1985 BLD 335. Mustafa Kamal J has dealt with
this decision and the aforesaid submission of Mr.
Ahmed and found them to be unacceptable with which
Ientirely agree and have nothing further to add.

17. I wish to point out that section 5 of the
Limitation Act does not apply automatically but it
has to be made applicable by or under any enactment.
Section 5 reads thus : ;

	5. Any appeal or applicatiori for (a revision
or) areview of judgment or for Icave to appeal or
any other application to which this section may be
made applicable (by or under any enacument) for
the time being in force may be admitted after the
period of limitation prescribed thereof, when the
appellant or applicant satisfies the Court that he
has sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or
making the application within such period.
	Explanation—The fact that the appellant or
applicant was misled by any order, practice or
judgment of the (High Court Division) in
ascertaining or computing the prescribed period of
limitation may be sufficient cause within the
Meaning of this section."

18. Section 29(2)(a) of the Act provides that for
the purpose of determining the period of limitation
Certain provisions of the Limitation Act, namcly,
Section 4, sections 9-18 and section 22 shall apply
Only insofar as, and to the extent to which, they are not
expressly excluded by the special law and clause (b)
Provides that ‘the remaining provisions of this Act
Shall not apply.’ Now. section 5 is not one of the

provisions which are to apply in the absence of
something to the contrary. It is one of the sections to
which clause (b) is applicable. This provision,
however, does not prohibit any special law making
section 5 applicable to that law. Clause (b) only means
that so far as the Limitation Act is concemed, section 5
is not to be deemed to be one which is to be applied to
the special law. The expression in clause (b) that "the
remaining provisions of this Act shall not apply”
means that they are not to apply proprio vigore, that is, ©
merely by virtue of the Limitation Act itself, and that
if they are to apply, the grounds for applying them
must be found in the special law itself.

19. In view of this clear provision in clause (b)
and in the absence of anything to the contrary in the
special law it must be held that section 5 is excluded
in determining the period of limitation for an appeal
under the special laws involved in these appeals. Thus
the question at issue is answered in the affirmative.

Mustafa Kamal J : While agreeing with the
decision given by my learned brother Latifur Rahman,
J. I would like to add the following :

21. It is not disputed that the Emergency
Requisition of Property Act, 1948 and the Local -
Government (Union Parishads) Ordinance, 1983
(Ordinance No. XL of 1983) are special/local laws.

22. For facility of understanding and appreciating
the arguments in support of and against the availability
of section 5 of the Limitation Act in an appeal under a
special/local law, it will be useful to quote section 29
(2) of the Limitation Act as follows :—

"29. Savings.
(1)..............................
(2) Where any special law prescribes for any
suit, appeal or application a period of limitation
different from the period prescribed thereof by the
first schedule, the provision of section 3 shall
apply, as if such period were prescribed thereof in
that schedule, and for the purpose of determining
any period of limitation prescribed for any suit,
appeal or application by any special law—

(a) the provisions contained in section 4, sections
9 to 18, and section 22 shall apply only inso-
far as, and to the extent to which, they are not
expressly excluded by such special law; and

(b) the remaining provisions of this Act shall not
apply." .

            
            23. Mr. Khandker Mahbubuddin Ahmed, leamed
Counsel for the appellant in Civil Appeal No.15 of
1990, submits that the special/local law must
prescribe a period of limitation different from the first
schedule, Othenvise neither clause (a) nor clause (b) of
section 29(2) will apply. The period of limitation
prescribed in the Local Government (Union Parishads)
Ordinance, 1983 for filing an appeal against the
decision of the Election Tribunal is not a period, he
submits, different from the one prescribed thereof by -
the first schedule. The special law deals with a different
set of situations not covered by the first schedule and it
has prescribed a law of limitation of its own to mect
the new situation, Section 29(2), therefore, is not
applicable to Ordinance No. XL of 1983, he submits.

24. This argument cannot be accepted, first,
because, prescribing a period of limitation of its own
to mect special situations in a special law is a mode of
prescribing a period of limitation different from the
first schedule and secondly, acceptance of this
argument will mean that even scction 3 will be
inapplicable to special laws, in which case no appcal,
etc. can be dismissed even though barred by
limitation, a consequence not contemplated by the
Iegislature. I am supported in my vicw in the case of
the Canara Bank Ltd. Ys. The Warden Insurance Co.
Ltd. AIR 1953 Bombay 35, a decision by Chagla, CJ
sitting with Gajendragadkar, J.

25. The judgment of a learned Single Judge of
the High Court Division in Mustafa @ Mustafizur
Rahman Vs. The State : 1985 BLD 335, calls for
some comment. An appeal from any order, judgment
or sentence of a Special Tribunal constituted under the
Special Powers Act lay to the High Court Division
within 30 days from the date of delivery or passing of
the order, judgment or sentence. The question was,
-whether section 5 of the Limitation Act was
applicable to this special law, namely, The Special
Powers Act. The learned Judge held that section 29(2)
has two parts. The first part relates to the applicability
of section 3 and the second part relates to the question
of determination of the period of limitation. Clauses
(a) and (b) of section 29(2), according to the leamed
Judge, relate to the second part. Clause (a) specifies
the sections of the Limitation Act which shall apply
for such determination and clause (b) states that "the
remaining provisions" which can only mean "the
remaining provisions relating to the question of
determination of the period of limitation", shall not

apply, As section 5 of the Limitation Act does not
relate to the question of determination of the period of
limitation and the occasion for exercise of this powor
by the Court arises only after the expiry of the periog
of limitation determined or computed in accordance
with law, the Iearned Judge held that the words
“reamaining provisions" in clause (b) of section 29(2)
do not cover section 5. According to him, section 5
has not been affected by the second part of section 29
(2). The leamed Judge held that the power of the Coun
to admit an appeal even after expiry of the period of
limitation prescribed by the Special Powers Act, a
special law, under section 5 remains.

26. To examine this view, I shall quote section
3 of the Limitation Act which is as follows :

"3, Subject to the provisions contained in
sections 4 to 25 (inclusive), every suit instituted,
appeal preferred, and application made, after the
period of limitation prescribed thereof by the first
schedule shall be dismissed, although limitation
has not been sct up as a defence."

27. Section 3 deals with the principal subject of
the bar of limitation. The heading of the section °
is-"dismissal of suits, etc., instituted, etc., after period _
of limitation". Section 3, therefore, primarily
provides for dismissal of suits, etc., if instituted after
the period of limitation. The opening words of section
29(2) make "the provision of section 3" applicable to
special/local laws when they provide a period of
limitation different from the first schedule. It means
that a suit, appeal or application arising out of a
special/local law will be similarly dismissed if filed
after the period of limitation prescribed thereof,
although limitation has not been set up as a defence. If
section 3 has a first part, namely, the question of
dismissal qua bar of limitation, the first part of
section 29(2) is parallel to it.

28. It is further provided in section 3 that it will
be subject to sections 4 to 25 of the Limitation Act
The net effect of this provision is that the dismissal of
a suit etc., after the period of limitation, is the rule,
but for the purpose of determining the period of
limitation, sections 4 to 25 will have to be applied. !
do not think that the word "determination" of the
period of limitation is used in a narrow and restricted
sense in the second part of section 29(2), so as [0
exclude section 5. Section 5 is given the heading
"Extension of period in certain cases". When the
period of limitation is "extended" it is certainly an

            
            exercise corollary to determination of period of
limitation. As section 3 has a second part, namely, the
question of determination of pcriod of limitation, so
has section 29(2). Its second part is parallel to the
second part of section 3. The second part of section 29
(2) reads :

"and for the purpose of determining any
period of limitation ",

29. Whereas section 3 provides that the
provisions of sections 4 to 25 will apply for
determination of period of limitation clause (a) of
section 29(2) dealing with the same subject of
determination of period of limitation in respect of
special/local laws provides that only sections 4, 9-18
and 22 of the Limitation Act will apply. Any
reference, therefore, to section 3 in section 29(2) will
have to be read along with the remaining provisions
contained in clauses (a) and (b) of section 29(2).
Section 29 is a saving clause. It will override the other
provisions of the Limitation Act. The legislative
mandate contained in clause (b) of section 29(2),
namely, that "the remaining provisions of the
Limitation Act shall not apply", must be held to have
been expressed in absolute terms. These words of
clause (b) of section 29(2) will prevail over both
section 3 and section 5.

30. Section 29(2) was inserted by a legislative
amendment in 1922. Before the amendment, clause (b)
of section 29(1) held the fort as follows :

"(1) Nothing in this Act shall—
(a).................................
(b) affect or alter any period of limitation
specially prescribed for any suit, appeal or
application by any special or local law now or
hereafter in force in British India”.

Following controversies over the interpretation

Of clause (b) of section 29(1), the present sub-section

(2) was enacted in 1922. The following reason was
given by the Select Committee for the change :

"We have carefully considered each section in
parts II and III of the Act for the purpose of
deciding whether it should apply to periods of
limitation prescribed by special or local laws or
not. We think provisions should be made that
Section 4; sections 9-18 and section 22 should
apply, unless they are expressly excluded by the
special or local laws, and that the remaining
provisions of the Act should not apply. This


will, of course, not preclude amendments of
special or local laws with a view to the
application of such provisions.” Gazette of India,
1922, part V page 74.

31. As for earlier decisions on this subject, the
cases of Bangladesh Vs. Moslem Mia, 31 DLR (AD)
45 and Syed Amir Hossain Vs. Mrs. Nadera Rahman,
37 DLR (AD) 184 have dealt with the law of
limitation with regard to special/local laws, but the
applicability of section 5 did not come up for specific
consideration. Two judgments of the High Court
Division the cases of Aftabuddin Vs. Sajjad Ali, 1986
BLD 235 and Serajuddin and others Vs. Ahmed Fazlur
Rahman and another, 1986 BLD 258 upheld the view
that section 5 has no application to special/local
laws.

32. Section 5 was made specifically applicable
to special/local laws by the Indian Legislature in the
Indian Limitation Act 1963. It can reasonably be
argued that if section 5 was already available under the
old Act its express applicability i in the new Act was
uncalled for.

33. Mr. Khandkar Mahbubuddin Ahmed
submits further that in the case represented by him the
delay was condoned ex parte without hearing the
respondent and so the condonation of delay ought to
be treated asa provisional one. The matter can be
agitated by the respondent before the Election
Appellate Tribunal at the time of the hearing of the
appeal.

34. Mr. TH Khan, learned Counsel for
respondent No.1 in the same appeal, contends,
however, that the Election Appellate Tribunal could
have issued a Rule upon the respondent to show cause
why the delay shall not be condoned. But the delay
was condoned ex parte and the appeal was registered,
leaving thereafter no scope to re-agitate the question.

35. I think in the facts and circumstances of the
case Mr. Khan's submission is correct. The Election
Appellate Tribunal did not even provisionally admit
the appeal, leaving the question of condonation of
delay open. It decided once and for all the condonation
matter. The respondent had no other option but to
move the High Court Division in revision.

36. There remains the submission advanced by
the learned Additional Attorney-General appearing for
the respondents in Civil Appeal Nos. 13 and 14 of '
1990, that when an order appealed against is a nullity

            
            the statute of limitation will not apply and the appeal
can be entertained beyond the period of limitation
because a void need not be avoided until it affects the
aggrieved person. Several cases, namely, the cases of
Syed Mahmud Alam Vs. Syed Mehdi Hussain, PLD
1970 (Lahore) 6, The Punjab Province Ys. The
Federation of Pakistan, PLD 1956 (FC) 72, Badri
Narayan Agarwalla Vs. Pak. Jute Balers Ltd., PLD
1966 (Dhaka) 262, Anisminic Limited Vs. The
Foreign Compensation Commission, (1969) I All
ER 208, Pearlman Ys. Keepers and Governors of
Harrow School, (1979) I All ER 365 and O'Reilly Ys.
Mackman and others, (1982) 3 All ER 1124 have been
cited by him in support of his submission. Mr. MA
Gafur, learned Advocate-on-record for the appellants
has, on the other hand, cited the case of Madhavan
Pillai Somanatha Pillai and another Vs. State of
Kerala and others, AIR 1966 Kerala 212 (SB) in aid of
his submission that the order appealed against is not a
nullity but the grounds of appeal reveal at worst an
illegality in the exercise of jurisdiction, which also he
does not concede.

37. In an appropriate case the submissions made
by the two sides may be considered but I do not think
that in the facts and circumstances of the present case
the point raised calls for any decision. No case of
nullity has been set out by the Government in the two
appeals before the High Court Division. Besides, no
decision can be given on nullity, which varies from
case to case, unless the facts are before this Court after
adjudication by the Courts below.

With these words I concur with the decision given
by my learned brother.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Civil)

Shahabuddin      | Tamizul Haque and another..
Ahmed CJ, MH     | ..... Appellants
Rahman J and ATM | Vs.
Afzal J.         | Shamsul Haque and Others,
		     | Respondents in
		     | CA Nos. 39 to 41 of 1986*
Judgment 	     | M/s. Haque Brothers Limited
		     |...... Appellant
May 31, 1990.    | Vs.
		     | Shamsul Haque and others...
		     | ........Respondent 
		     |in CA No. 42 of 1986*
		     | M/s. Haque Brothers (Indus-
		     | tries) Limited........ Appellant
		     | Vs.
		     | Shamsul Haque and others....,
		     | .......Respondents
		     | in CA No. 43 of 1986*
		     | M/s. Haque Brothers (Carbide)
		     | Limited............... Appellant
		     | Vs.
		     | Shamsul Haque and others.....
		     |......Respondent
		     | in CA No. 44 of 1986*

Companies Act (VII of 1913)
Sections 38 & 40

Share register is maintained under sec. 40 which
is prima facie evidence of any matter to be inserted
therein but. where both parties have led all their
evidence, the question of initial presumption as
contemplated in sec. 40 lost all its importance. When
the facts involved are not complicated calling for 4
detailed investigation in a separate forum,
applications for correction of share registers are quite
maintainable,

Kumbhan Lakshman Vs. Tangirala Venkalaswarila 2
DLR (FC) 83; Mohendra Kumar Jain Vs. Federal Chemical
Works Lid. & ors. 35 Company Cases 651; Anil Gupta Vs-
Delhi Cloth & General Mills 54 Company Cases 301; Jawhat
Mills Lid. Vs. Official Receiver Sha Mulchand & Co. Lid. 19
Company Cases 138; Dhalaket Tea Co. Ltd. AIR 1957 (C2)
476; People's Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. M/s. Cre Wood Co.


*Civil Appeal Nos. 39 to 44 of 1986. d

(From the judgments ‘and orders daté
23.4.1986 passed by the High Court Division, Dhak@
in Company Appeal Nos. 5, 6, 7 of 1985).

            
            AIR 1960 (Pun), 388; United Planters & Traders Ltd. Vs.
Mosharraf Hossain Khan; 34 DLR 345; Ellal Textile Mills
Ltd. Vs. Abdul Awal 1985 BLD (AD) 230 ref. (16-18)

Limitation Act (IX of 1908)
Section 6
Companies Act (VII of 1913)
Section 38

Section 6 of the Limitation Act does not bring an
application under section 38 of the Companies Act
within its ambit. The suit is restricted to a suit or
proceeding to be instituted or application to be made
by a person suffering from any legal disability. ...(22)

Art. 181

Applicability of this Article in the matter of an
application under sec. 38 of the Companies Act—When
the Limitation Act has remained silent, Appellate
Division is reluctant to travel beyond its fixed path to lay
down a law bringing an application under sec. 38 of the
Companies Act within the ambit of the residuary Art.
181. An application for rectification of a share register
under sec. 38 is left to be governed by the general
principle that it shall be filed within a reasonable time
and not after inordinate delay, depending on facts and
circumstances of a particular case.

Syed Ishtiaq Ahmed, Senior Advocate, M.
Nurullah, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court,
(Mahmudul Islam, Advocate, Supreme Court with
him), instructed by Md. Sajjadul Huq,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellants (in CA
Nos: 39 to 41).

- Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court (Mr. Khalilur Rahman, Advocate, Supreme
Court, with him), instructed by Mr. Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record—F or the Respondent
No. 1 (in CA Nos. 39 to 41/86)

Not represented — Respondent Nos. 2-4.

Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, (Mr. Fazlul Haque, Advocate, Supreme Court,
with him), instructed by Mr. Md. Aftab Hossain,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellants (in CA
Nos. 42 to 44 of 1986):

  Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, Senior Advocate, Supreme

Court, (Mr. Khalilur Rahman, Advocate, Supreme

Court, with him), instructed by Mr. Sharifuddin

Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For the

Respondent No.1 (in CA Nos. 42 to 44 of 1986).
Not represented— Respondent Nos. 2-5.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ : These six appeals
by special Icave are directed against a common
judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court
Division, dated 23 April 1986, upholding an order of
the Company Judge, dated 28 March 1985, directing
rectification of the Share Registers of the
Appellants-Companies under section 38 of the
Companies. Act, 1913, in Matter Nos. 39, 40, 41 of
1982. The Companies are M/s. Haque Brothers Ltd.,
M/s. Haque Brothers (Industries) Ltd., and M/s. Haque
Brothers (Carbide) Ltd. They are all Private Limited
Companies incorporated under the Companies Act,
1913 with Head Office at Imamganj, Dhaka. Their
common Managing Director is Appellant No. 1 in
Civil Appeal Nos. 39, 40 & 41; his wife Mrs.
Yasmin Suzette Haque, is Appellant No. 2, while the
Companies are Appellants in Civil Appeal Nos. 42,
43 and 44. Respondent No. 1 in all these six appeals
is a Director of the Companies who brought these
Matters before Court by three applications. As
common question of law and fact are involved in these
appeals, they have been heard together and are going
to be disposed of by this judgment.

2. In this judgment, for the sake of convenience,
the Managing Director will be referred to as the
appellant, the Companies as the "Company" and
Respondent No. 1 as the respondent. At the beginning
5 brothers namely, appellant Tamizul Hoque,
respondent Shamsul Hoque, Azizul Hoque, Anwarul
Hoque and Moktarul Hoque were the only
Directors—Share holders of each of the Companies.
After some time the last mentioned two brothers died
whereupon their heirs were substituted. Respondent,
Shamsul Hoque, left.Bangladesh in July 1972 and
resided in Calcutta. He returned to Bangladesh in April
1977 and having heard about. unauthorised and
fraudulent transfer of most: of his shares in the
"Company" in favour of the appellant and his wife he
wanted to examine the Records of the Company's
papers, but the appellant, by a letter dated 24 April
1977, directed the officers of the Company not to
allow him any access. to the Company's papers.
Respondent made enquiries in the office of the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies, briefly, the
"Registrar" and learnt that in the annual Returns and
Summary Shares of the Company for the year 1971,
his 4450 shares out of the total of 5267 were shown
transferred to the appellant and his wife. He filed a

            
            complaint to the Registrar alleging that his shares had
been illegally and fraudulently transferred and prayed
for rectification of the share-register. A Salish was
held by common fricnds and relations of these two
brothers but ultimately it failed whereupon he made
the three applications to the learned Company Judge
for rectification of the share=register.

3. ‘Those applications. were resisted by the
Managing Director and the Company in separate
Affidavits-in-Opposition denying the material
allegations. Their common case was that in November
1970, when the appellant married appellant No. 2,
Mrs. Yesmen Suzette Haque, all members of the
family assembled and in their presence the respondent
disclosed that in vicw of the deteriorating political
situation of the country he would leave the country for
India; that he requested the appellant to purchasc his
shares in the Company, and accordingly, the appellant
purchased the bulk of the respondent's shares, as
mentioned above, by transferring the same to his
name and to the name of his wife. The Board of
Directors, it was alleged, approved this transfer, and
with permission of the State Bank of Pakistan the
transfer of share to appellant No.2, who was then a
British national, was regularised; this transfer took
place in January 1971 and was correctly shown in the
Annual Returns of that year. The respondent retained a
small number of shares, that is, the balance—1817
shares only—in his name; nevertheless he was
allowed to draw his full remuneration as a Director. It
was contended that after returning from India in 1977
the respondent, out of sheer greed and rapacity for
money, and prompted by evil motive, started trouble
in the Company and made attempt to extort money
from officers of the Company, whereupon the
Company lodged an 'ejahar' with the Police against
the respondent. Complaint to the Registrar and the
applications under section 38, it was alleged, were
mere counter-blasts to the Criminal Proceeding which
was initiated against the respondent. The transfer was
made, it was claimed, in usual manner, under an
Instrument of Transfer and the consideration was paid
in full; but in the wake of the War of Liberation the
Company's Head Office at Imamganj and the
Managing Director's residence at Eskaton were
ransacked and looted by miscreants, in the course of
which, all valuable documents including the
Instrument of Transfer and Receipt for payment of the
consideration money, were lost. The respondent,
taking advantage of loss of the documents relating to

the transfer of his shares, filed the applications falsely
claiming rectification of the share-register, Tho
applications were also resisted on the grounds of
waiver, acquiescence and limitation.

4. During the trial of the applications which
were also heard analogously, both partics led evidence
in support of their respective claims and contentions,
Original position of respective shares of the parties
was not disputed, but it is the subsequent transfer of
4450 shares of the respondent in favour of the
Managing Director and his wife which is disputed,
This transfer was recorded in the Share-register, but
the corresponding Annual Returns in Form-E,
submitted to the Registrar, for the year 1971 contain a
number of erasurcs, alterations and substitutions,
which are, according to the respondent, subsequent
alteration by interpolation, and are according to the
appellants mere correction of some innocuous errors,
To-this question I shall come in due course. But in
support of the transfer, which was denied outright by
the respondent, the appellant could not produce any
documents except a Ictter, dated 26 December 1975,
written by the respondent from Calcutta, addressing
his brother, the appellant in Dhaka. This is Ext. L,
and according to the appellant, this letter is a clear
admission of the respondent that he had transferred his
shares to him. But according to the respondent, it is
not an admission at all, and to counteract it, he
produced a letter dated 2 January 1976 (Ext.6)
addressed to him by the appcllant, obviously in
response to his letter, Ext. L. According to the
respondent's interpretation of Ext. L, his brother
assured him that none of his "shares would be
disturbed" and that he "must have faith" in him. It is
the interpretation of these two Ictters on which the
Trial Court as well as the Appellate Court mainly
based their reasons for rejecting the appellants’ claim
of transfer of the shares. Leave was granted by us to
consider whether the interpretation of Ext. L, read
with Ext. 6, as givien by the Courts below, is correct.

5. The letter Ext. L contains, among other
things, the following :

"Keeping in view the condition of health, !
request you to kindly transfer all my shares which
I had transferred in your favour as-per your
request. Please immediately arrange ils
photocopy."

In reply thereto the appellant wrote the letter,
Ext. 6 which reads thus : ’

            
            "D/O Shares : I could not understand when
you say that some of your D/O shares was
transferred at my request. In the first place I do not
remember about any transfer of your share at my
request. Please let me have more details about it
so that I may attend to your request. In any event
none of your shares in the Companies will be
disturbed and in this connection you must have
some faith in me."

6. Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed, learned Counsel for the
appellant, contends that the letter Ext. L is a clear
admission of the respondent that he had transferred his
shares in favour of his brother. Mr. Ahmed has
submitted that a party's admission fulfilling the
requirement of law, sec. 21 of Evidence Act, is
substantive evidence, and if it is clearly and
unequivocally made then it is the best evidence against
the party making it and though not conclusive, shifts
the onus on to its maker. He has referred to a decision
in the case of Thiru John Vs. Subramanyan, AIR
1977 SC 1724 in support of this view. He had also
cited the principle as to admission laid down by the
Privy Council in "Ramji Kumar Vs. Chouduri Nar
Pat. Sing", 34 [A-27 where it was observed : What a
party himself admits to be true may reasonably be
presumed to be so. Following this principle the then
Dacca High Court held in the case of Nur Mohd. Mallik
Vs. Sudhir K, Biswas, 17 DLR 15, that "there is no
doubt but that the express admissions of a party to a
suit, or admissions implied from conduct are evidence
and strong evidence against him, but at the same time
he is at liberty to prove that such admissions were
mistaken or not true". Mr. Ahmed is of the opinion that
the respondent in this case has not rebutted the
presumption from his admission in Ext. L.

7. I have no quarrel with this principle as to
evidentiary value of an admission, and if the letter Ext.
L is an admission within the meaning of section 17,
Evidence Act, then it is a strong evidence that its
maker had transferred his shares, but later on, he was
requesting his brother to re-transfer those transferred

shares to him in view of the condition of his health:

An admission is a statement, oral or documentary,
suggesting an inference as to any fact in issue, or a

relevant fact. An admission, though strong evidence:

against its maker, ‘is not, however, conclusive proof
of the matter admitted; and so long it does not operate
as estoppel, the person making. the admission is at
liberty to contradict it or to show that it is not true or
correct but it-was made on mistake of fact or under

some misapprehension. But a statement, when it is
sought to be used as an admission of its maker, by
way of proof of a fact stated therein, must be clear,
definite and unambiguous, leaving no doubt about its
content. A statement which is vague or whose
meaning cannot be gathered or which is capable of
different interpretations is not an admission. The letter
Ext. L shows that the respondent had transferred his
shares to his brother, at his brother's request, before he
left the country. After about 5 years he requested his
brother for re-transfer of those very shares. In reply to
this letter the appellant wrote that he did not
understand what was meant by the transfer at his
request but assured his younger brother that none of
his shares would be disturbed and that further details
should be supplied so that he (appellant) could look
into the matter. His statement in Ext. 6 made the
statement in Ext. L more ambiguous. The learned
Company Judge therefore took the view that there was
some "shady arrangement" between the two brothers
in respect of the shares and that had there been any real
transfer there would not have arisen any question of
re-transfer. Non mention of any consideration for the
proposed re-transfer of the shares and the "transfer" at
the request of the transferee, tend to show that the
respondent while leaving the country in view of the
deteriorating political situation did not mean actual
transfer of his share but some kind of arrangement was
made for custody of his shares. Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed has
criticised the learned Company Judge for the
observation as to some "shady arrangement" and
argued that any shady arrangement is not the case of
either of the parties to this matter, but it is a third case
made out by the learned Judge.

8. The Appellate Court, however, took the view
that the admission was a qualified one, that is, the
transfer was not made at the instance of the transferor
but was made at the request of the transferee and that
when demand for return of those shares was made and
when there was indication of some undisclosed
arrangement between the brothers regarding the shares
for the period of absence of one of the brothers, then
this transfer was not a normal one. In any case, we
find it difficult to accept the contention of Mr. Ishtiaq
Ahmed that by observing that there was some ‘shady
arrangement’ a third case was made out. Again, this
letter Ext. L shows the transfer in favour of the
appellant, but according to the appellants, as well as
according to the share-register the respondent's shares
were transferred both to the appellant, Managing

            
            Director and his wife appellant No. 2. As to the words
“as per your request" the appellant did not contradict the
respondent in the letter Ext. 6 that the transfer was not
made at his request but was made for valuable
consideration. Instead the appellant stated that he could
not understand what was meant by the respondent when
he said that shares were transferred "at my request". In
the next sentence he stated that he does not remember
about any transfer "of your share at my request" and
requested him to supply more details about it so that he
could attend to his request. Further he stated "in any
event none of his brother's shares in the Companies
would be disturbed". Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed has tried to
explain that by this assurance the appellant mcant that
the remaining shares of his brother---shares excluding
the transferred ones----would not be disturbed. But
when the transfer itself is in dispute it is difficult to
accept the explanation that the remaining shares after
the disputed transfer is meant. In any case, in reply to
the respondent's letter, Ext. L, demanding re-transfer of
his shares, the appellant did not make out a case of any
usual, normal transfer of shares having becn made
earlier. A statement like this in Ext. L which is not
clear in its meaning and definite in its intention cannot
be accepted as an admission so as to bind its maker
thereby.

9. Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed had contended that the
Appellate Court has fallen into a palpable error when
it observed that Ext. L could not be used as admission
against its maker because the latter did not know,
when he made the admission, that it would be uscd as
evidence against him. This view is of course not
correct, for a statement to be used as admission against
the person making it, it is not necessary that he must
have prior knowledge that it might be used against
him. But this view is not found to have affected the
Appellate Court's finding that Ext. L does not
constitute an admission.

10. Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, Icarned Counsel for
the respondent, has tried to exclude Ext. L altogether
from consideration as an admission taking two
grounds. One ground is that ‘admission’ under
Suspicious circumstances is not an admission at all
and that title cannot pass by mere admission.
Admission, he has argued, must be clear and free from
any ambiguity if it is to be used as substantive
evidence: against its maker. He has emphasized that
"weight to be attached to an admission is a matter
different from its use as admissible evidence". He has
sought support to this view from the case reported in
AIR 1966 (SC), pages 405 and 605. His other ground
is that even if Ext. L is an admission, it is irrelevant
in this case in view of the bar under section 23,
Evidence Act. As to the first ground, I have already
noticed that Ext. L is vague and ambiguous. As to the
bar of sec. 23, this section provides that no admission
is relevant if it is made by parties to a case upon an
express condition that evidence of it is not to be given
or under circumstances from which the Court can infer
that the parties agreed together that evidence of it
should not be given. This section contemplates some
attempt by the partics to a case for settling their
dispute outside the court by amicable means and they
agreed that admission of any liability during the
compromise talk will not be used as evidence in
Court, if the compromise fails, against the party
making it. Even if there was no such agreement

between parties while attempting at a compromise but
the admission is made under circumstances from
which the Court may infer such agreement for not
using the admission as evidence, such admission will
be without prejudice to the parties. Ext. L written
from Calcutta and received at Dhaka does not indicate
that there was any agreement between the two
brothers that the statement therein was not to be used
as evidence in court in future. Ext. L, therefore, does
not attract the prohibition of section 23. I shall now
see if there is any other evidence or circumstances
which may remove the vagueness of the letter Ext. L.

11. For transfer of shares in a Company an
application may be made cither by the transferor or the
transferee. Elaborate procedure for the registration of
transfer of shares has been laid down in Section 34 of
the Companies Act. Sub-section(3) of this section
provides that no transfer of shares shall be lawful
unless it is effected by a proper instrument of transfer
duly stamped and executed by both the transferor and
the transferee and it has been delivered to the
Company along with the scripts. In this case no
instrument of transfer has been produced, but it has
been explained that the instrument of transfer was lost
during the period of lawlessness prevailing in the
country. Evidence was led by the appellant to show —
that his house and office were looted at about the
relevant time. Neither of the courts below accepted
this explanation as a convincing one, particularly
when the appellant, Managing Director, could not say
who had prepared and written the instrument of
transfer, where, when and in whose presence.
Respondent denied having executed any instrument of

            
            transfer. He also denied having reccived any
considcration moncy. Appellant said he paid the
consideration moncy to his brother, but when asked
whether he paid the consideration involving a huge of
amount of moncy----Tk. 4.45 lac----in cash or in
cheque, be said he could not remember. He also could
not say from where he collected the money, whether
from his cash in hand or drawing from his bank
account. His answers like this on such a vital matter
can hardly be accepted as sufficient explanation for
absence of the instrument of transfer on payment of
money. He also failed to adduce any evidence to show
in whose presence the talk for the transfer was settled
or the money was paid.-Both the courts below
concurrently found, and in the circumstances of the
case we think rightly, that there was no instrument of
transfer on payment of consideration for the transfer.
This finding, based as it is on duc consideration of
evidence, cannot be interfered with in this appeal.

12. Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed argues that if there had
been a transfer of the shares, mere non-payment of the
consideration will not stand in the way of the transfer
becoming valid. He may be right in this point, but
where is the evidence of actual transfer except the
alleged admission Ext. L ? Dr. Rafiqur Rahman
contended that no transfer of shares is lawful unless it
is made by an instrument of transfer, and cited some
decisions in support such as the decision in the
cases of Madhap Ram Chandra Vs. Canara Banking
Corporation, AIR 1941 (Mad) 354 and New Citizen
Bank Vs, Asian Assurance Co. AIR 1945 (Bom) 149.

13. The appellant has relied upon the annual
Returns in the Form 'E' for the year 1971 in support of
the alleged transfer of the shares. But the respondent

has used the Retums as a weapon of attack saying that - .

at the time of submission of the Returns to the office
of the Registrar, the alleged transfer to the appellant
and his wife was not shown therein but at a subsequent
date, obviously for the purpose of this case, it was
shown replacing some original words and figures by
erasures and interpolations, Erasures and replacements
of certain words and figures in the Returns are not
disputed; but the appellant's explanation is that these
are mere alterations and not interpolations of the
Return, but some: correction has: been made in the

office. Both the Trial Court and the Appellate Court
rejected this explanation and observed that a matter of
transfer of a huge number of shares.was so important
and it was so well known to all concemed that it could

not have been omitted from being typed in the
Returns and secondly, if the mistakes were detected
before submission of the Returns new Forms for the
Returns would have been certainly used to record the
correct share positions instead of retaining them by
making so many corrections.

14. Mr. Ishtiaqg Ahmed has criticised the courts
below for holding that the alterations in the Returns
(Ext. 1 series) were interpolations having been
brought in at a later time, but I find hardly any basis
for this criticism. The Returns have been typed from a
type-writer machine; the alterations have been typed
from a different type-writer machine. Nobody
authenticated the altcrations by putting his signature
therein. It is clear, and there is no dispute, that before .
the alteration of some words and figures the Retumms
showed the original Share-position of the respondent,
Shamsul Huq, having in the three companies
respectively 1170, 1890 and 2207 shares. But after
erasure and alteration his shares have been shown
respectively as 270, 265 and 286 by changing the
original figures. As for example, in the Returns in
respect of M/s. Huq Brothers Ltd. his share was first
shown to be 1170; then the figures '11' were erased
and the figure '2' was brought in making his share
'270'. Correspondingly, figures '900' have been typed
and shown as transferred. As to the Share-holders'
names, Mr. Yasmin Suzette Haque was not there at all
in the Return before the alteration, but her name was
added as the last comer by typing it by a different
type-writer. Similar erasure, alteration and addition
have been made in the Returns for the other two
Companies. Now the question is why there was such
omission of the transfer altogether, and when the
omission was detected, why new Forms-E were not
taken to make fresh Returns, but instead, dubious
method was adopted—such as erasures, alterations and
additions if the omission were detected before
submission of the Returns to the Registrar's office ?
The appellant has deposed that the Return in each case
was prepared and submitted by his manager and that he
had not knowledge about it. But admittedly the
Manager, Quayum was a witness to the transfer which
took place on 3 January 1971 but the Returns were
submitted on 25 October 1971. Mr. Ahmed has
argued that the respondent was in Dhaka when the
Retums were submitted and he was also in charge of
the Company's office temporarily and had access to all
papers to the Company; furthermore, he examined the
Retums in the Registrar's office after he returned from

            
            Calcutta in 1977 but did not raise any question as to
the alleged interpolation of the Returns, which means,
he did not find any wrong in the ‘correction’; but he
madc it an issuc only for the purposc of his case. I do
not think that this argument has got any substance,
for the erasure, alteration and addition were not made
by any writing and penning-through in the original
statement, but these were made by typing in such a
way that without a very close examination these
changes are not visible. Even if these are not
interpolations, these rendered the alleged transfer a
highly doubtful matter and in absence of any proof of
the transfer the courts below were quite justified to
reject the claim of transfer.

15. Mr. Rafique-ul-Hugq, learned Counsel has
appeared for the "Company" in the separate appeal
Nos. 42, 43 and 44 of 1986. In respect of the transfer,
its denial, alleged admission, non-availability of
instrument of transfer, passing of considcration and
the Returns with erasers and altcrations thereof, he has
adopted the argument led by Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed. In
addition, he has urged four grounds. He has referred to
an application of the Company dated 25.8.86 taking
some additional grounds after the leave was granted on
17.7.86. Leave was granted mainly on the ground of
the alleged admission in the letter Ext. 'L’. The new
grounds are in fact not altogether new, for these
grounds were mentioned in the Company's leave
applications, but these were not specifically referred to
in the Leave Granting Order. We have allowed him to
make his full submission on these grounds not only
in the interest of justice, but also of the fact that some
of the questions, such as limitation, are of
considerable public importance.

16. Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq, has questioned the
maintainability of the applications under section 38 of
the Companies Act for correction of the Company's
share-register. The share register is maintained under
section 40 of the Companies Act and it is said therein
that the register shall be prima facie evidence of any
matter directed or authorised by the Act to be inserted
therein, The learned Counsel contends that the
share-register of the Company should be presumcd to
contain correct statement of the share positions of the
parties concerned, but that this presumption has not
been rebutted by the respondent. In reply thereto, Dr.

Rafiqur Rahman-has said that when both parties to a
case have led evidence on which a decision can be made
by the court, then the onus of proof becomes mere

academic; in support of this view he has referred ‘to a

decision of the Privy Council in the case of Kumbhan
Lakshman Ys. Tangirala Venkaraswarila, 2 DLR
(PC) 83, The question of initial presumption ag
contemplated in sec. 40, I think, lost all its importance
in this case as both parties have Icd all their evidence,
The next question raised by Mr. Rafique-ul-Hugq is that
facts involved in this case being very complicated in
nature. this question cannot be gone into and decided in
a summary proceeding under sec. 38 of the Companies
Act; the applications are therefore liable to be rejecteq
as not maintainable. In reply, Dr. Rafiqur Rahman has
submitted that in the total absence of any proof that the
respondent had transferred his shares, mere entry in
respect of transfer in the share-register did not make the
matter complicated. Both the learned Counsels have
cited a number of decisions in support of their
respective contentions.

17. In Mohendra Kumar Jain Vs. Federal
Chemical Works Ltd. and ors, 35 Company Cases,
651, an application for rectification of share register
of a company was filed under s. 155 of the Companies
Act as amended in India; this section corresponds to
s.38 of the unamended Act. The petitioner's very title
to the share claimed by him was denied by the
respondent who also alleged that the petitioner was a
benamder of his father. On an objection to the
application it was held that when the petitioner's title
to the share was itself very much disputed, and there
were several disputed questions of fact requiring
determination, s.155 could not be applied and that the
petitioner was free to pursue his remedy in the Civil
Court. In Anil Gupta Vs. Delhi Cloth and General
Mills Co. Ltd., 54 Company Cases, 301 it has been
observed that "in case disputed or complicated
questions of fact and law arise, recourse cannot be had
to s.155 of the Companies Act." In that case one party
asserted and the other party denied the alleged transfer
of shares and since determination of the question
involved a detailed investigation into the facts the
exercise of summary jurisdiction for correction of the
share-register was refused: In Jawahar Mills Lid. Vs.
Official. Receiver, Sha Mulchand & Co. Ltd., 19
Company Cases, 138, a suit was filed for a declaration
that a forfeiture of shares was illegal and a mandatory
injunction for restoration of the petitioner's name in
the share-register under s.38 was held to be not
maintainable under'sections 48 or 49 of the Act. In
Dhalaket Tea Co. Ltd. AIR 1957 (Cal) 476 and 19
People's Insurance Co. Lid. Vs. M/S. CRE WOOD
& Co.‘AIR. 1960 (Pun) 388 similar views----1.e.




            
            serious questions involving disputed questions of fact
should not be tried in a summary procedure under sec.
155, have been taken. But in the latter, the Court
ordered rectification of the share-register considering
the merit of that case. On the other hand, in United
Planters and Traders Ltd. Vs. Mosharraf Hossain
Khan, 34 DLR 345, a learned Single Judge of the High
Court Division held that the provisions of s. 38 are
very wide and the Court has ample scope and power to
grant relief and save the parties from being harassed
and unnecessarily relegated to protracted litigation in a
simple case but the Court has discretion to refuse
remedy if the matter is not a simple one. The learned
Judge in that connection had relied on a decision of the
Dhaka High Court in Anath Bandhu Guha and Sons
Lid., 7 PLR (Dhaka series, 1959) in which it was held
that "the wide terms of sub-section (3) of this section
are not to be limited by the terms of sub-sections (1)
& (2) thereof and the Court can grant appropriate relief
irrespective of any finding of fraud, error, mistake or
default on the part of the company". In Elias Textile
Mills Lid. Vs. Abdul Awal, 1985 BLD (AD) 230,
this Court observed that the question as to
rectification of a share register could not be mixed up
with an application for winding up the Company in
which creditor's rights were of paramount importance
and that the Court will not exercise its discretion for
rectification of a share-register if there is complicated
question of title.

18. Now the question is whether the facts
involved in the respondent's applications for
rectification of the share registers are of such a nature
that they cannot be disposed of in. a summary
proceeding. In the light of the discussion of the cases
referred to above and on consideration of the facts and
circumstances of the case I find that the facts involved
are not complicated calling for a detailed investigation
in a separate forum. I find that these applications are
quite maintainable. Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq has argued
that fraud has been alleged in the applications and as
Such this allegation cannot be determined in a
summary proceeding. I find that independent of the .
question as to interpolation of the Returns Ext. 1
Series, and even if these Returns are held to be
genuine, the appellant's.claim of transfer of the shares
remained unsupported by any evidence excepting the
alleged admission and if it is not an admission then
there i is no basis for the share-register.

19. The next question raised by Mr.
Rafique- ul- Hud: is that act and conduct of the
respondent, coupled with the inordinate delay in filing
the applications show. that he had acquiesced in the
transfer and waived his right to his shares in favour of
his brother; his applications are’ in these
circumstances -hit by the principle of waiver,
acquiescence and estoppel. Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq has
pointed out that the transfer took place in January
1971; he was in the country till July 1972; the
Returns were filed in October 1971 but he made no
attempt for correction of the record; and even after he
returned to the country in 1977 he did not file the
applications for correction till mid-1982. It is in
evidence that both the appellant and the respondent
were in Dhaka at the time of the alleged transfer in
January 1971. Thereafter, the respondent left the
country and remained away till April 1977. The
Returns were submitted in 1971. His case is that
neither had he waived his right to the shares, nor did he
acquiesce in the wrongful act done by the appellant
showing transfer of his shares, but as soon as he heard
about the matter he wrote the letter Ext. 'L' in
December 1975 and then himself came back in 1977
and when he went to efiquire about the matter from the ~
Company's office he was prevented from getting any
information by Officers of the Company under the
appellant's direction. The appellant lodged an "ejahar"
against him when he tried.to consult necessary papers
of the Company's office; he then filed a complaint to
the Registrar, and a salish was held to settle the matter
amicably. There is no dispute that common friends
and relations of the brothers including PWs 2 and 3—
held a salish though the attempt failed. These facts and
circumstances unerringly indicate that the respondent
did not waive his right nor did he acquiescence in the
act done by his brother, and as such, the principle of
waiver, acquiescence or estoppel cannot be applied
against him when he has filed the applications for
rectification of the share registers.

20. It is the question of limitation on which Mr.
Rafique-ul-Huq has concentrated all his time and
energy. He has contended that the Limitation Act,
1908 applies in this case; in particular, he contends
that Article 181 of this Act will govern these
applications. He contends that even if the limitation
starts from the date of his knowledge about the
transfer, that is, April 1977 when he returned from
Calcutta, or from: August 1977 when he was
prevented from entering the Company's office and
filed his complaint before the Registrar, still the
period of 3 years, as laid down in Art. 181 expired

            
            before he filed the applications in August 1982. Dr.
Rafiqur Rahman, on the other hand, contends that the
Limitation Act, particularly Article 181, is not at all
applicable to this case. He contends that for an
applications under sec. 38 of the Companies ' Act no
period of limitation has been prescribed in law and
consequently such an application will be governed by
the general principle of "reasonable time". He
contends that in the facts and circumstances of the case
particularly, in view of the respondent's effort for
settling the matter with his brother amicably and
outside the court, the delay of five years from the date
of his definite knowledge about the transfer is quite
reasonable and is not all an inordinate delay. Both the
learned Counsels cited a number of decisions in’
support of their respective contentions.

21. As stated above, in this case the question of
limitation did not figure prominently during the
hearing before the Trial Court and the Appellate Court,
Nor was it urged before in the way it is being urged now.
Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq has referred to sec. 3 of the
Limitation Act which provides that every suit
instituted, appeal preferred, and application made, after
the period of limitation prescribed by the First
Schedule, "shall be dismissed, although limitation has
not been set up as a defence." He has also sought
reliance upon a decision of the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council in the case of Raja Hara Narayan
Singh Vs. Chowdhurain Bhagaban Co. in Indian
Decisions Allahabad (7) ILR 13, p. 300. The question
raised there related to an arbitration award which was not
made within the time fixed by the Court's order. In that
case no objection on the ground of limitation was taken
nor the question was brought to the notice either of the
Subordinate Judge (Trial Court) or of the High Court in
appeal, but the Judicial Committee observed that "Now
the statute is there, and the judges were bound to take
Judicial notice of it." The award was declared invalid by
the Judicial Committee as it was time-barred.

22. The question now is whether there is any
law governing the present case, of which the Court
should take notice of. According to Dr. Rafiqur
Rahman, there is none. Mr, Rafiqul-Huq has referred
to sec. 6 of the Limitation Act as it stands amended in
1962. It enables a person suffering from any legal
disability to institute a suit or "proceeding" or make
an application for the execution of a decree after the
disability has ceased. Mr. Rafiqul Huq is of the view
that an application as referred to in this section
includes by analogy an application under sec. 38 as

weil, which will be governed by this section. I do not
think that sec. 6 brings an application under sec, 38 of
the Companies Act within its ambit. This section jg
restricted to a suit or proceeding to be instituted oy
application to be made, by a person suffering from
any legal disability, such as minority, insanity oy
idiocracy, in which case the period of limitation, as
prescribed in the Schedule of the Act, will start after
the disability ceases.

23. Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq strongly and
vehemently contends that Art. 181 of the First
Schedule (Third Division) of the Limitation Act will
govern the application under sec. 38 of the
Companies Act. This Article provides for an
application for which no period of limitation is
provided elsewhere in the Schedule of the Limitation
Act or by s. 48, Civil PC. If an application under s.38
is treated as an application for a proceeding under the
Civil PC then, of course, Article 181 will apply
thereto” But there is a long series of decisions to the
contrary to some of which I shall refer presently.

24. Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq has relied upon a
decision of Murshed CJ in Debendra Chandra Dev
Nath Vs. Bharat Chandra Singh, 19 DLR (Dac) 514.
In that case Article 181 was held to be applicable to an
application for pre-emption by a non notified
co-sharer, under s.26F of the BT Act. This section
provides for limitation of three years from the date of
transfer of a holding if the transfer has been notified to
the co-sharer. But in that Act there is no provision for
limitation in the case of a co-sharer who has not been
served with a notice of the transfer, and since no period
of limitation has been prescribed for pre-emption by 4
non-notified co-sharer in any other law, Article 181 of
the Limitation Act was brought into service. But the
learned Chief Justice was himself not convinced of the
reasoning for application of this Article when he said
“Although I am not convinced by the logic of the
decisions which have made Art. 181 applicable of
such cases, I hold that the said decisions have settled
the law, in deference to the principle that a long and
well-settled practice should not be lightly disturbed."
The learned Chief Justice, however, did not refer to
any particular case where Article 181 was made
applicable in similar cases.

25. Mr. Rafique-ul-Huq has referred 10 a
decision of the Indian Supreme Court in the case of
Sha Mul Chand & Co. Ys. Jawahar Mills Lid., AIR
(1953) 98 in which it was indicated that an application

            
            under s. 38 of the Companies Act might be governed
by Art.181 of the Limitation Act. Dr. Rafiqur
Rahman has also relied upon this decision in order to
press his contention that in fact Article 181 was not
held to be applicable to an application under s. 38. The
Supreme Court gave this decision in an appeal from a
judgment of the High Court reported in AIR 1951
(Mad) 572; Dr. Rahman has placed reliance on that
judgment also. Art. 181 prescribes a period of three
years for an application for which no period of
limitation is provided elsewhere in the First Schedule
or by sec.48 of the Civil PC. It has been observed by
the Supreme Court that Art. 181 "has, ina long series
of decisions of most, if not all, of the High Courts,
been held to govern only applications under the Code
of Civil Procedure. It may be that there may be
divergence of opinion even within the same High
Court but the prepondering view undoubtedly is that
the Article applies only to applications under the
Code". The Supreme Court in that connection referred
to a judgment of the Judicial Committee in Hansaraj
Gupta Vs. Official Liquidator, Dera Dun Mussourie
Tramway Co. 60 IA 13 PC in which the view was
taken that Art. 181 only relates to applications under
the Civil PC where no period of limitation has been
prescribed. However, a Special Bench of the Calcutta
High Court, in Asmat Ali, Vs. Mozahar Ali, 52 CWN
64, expressed the opinion that an application for
pre-emption by a non-notified co-sharer under the BT
Act’ should be governed'by Art. 181. But another
Division Bench of the same High Court, in Hurdutrai
Jogodish Prasad Vs. Official Assignee of Calcutta, 52
CWN .342, took the opposite view that Art. 181,
Limitation Act, applied only to applications under the
Civil PC and did not apply to an application under s.
56, Presidency Town Insolvency Act. Mukerjee, J.
was a party to this decision; but he had delivered the
judgment of the Special Bench also. He then explained
the anomalous position by pointing out that "the
entire procedure for an application under s. 26F of the
Bengal Tenancy Act was regulated by the Civil PC
and, therefore, an application for pre-emption was, as
it.were, an application under Civil PC". Their
Lordships of the Supreme Court, who took note of the
amendment of Articles 158 and 178, were of the view
that such amendment did not alter the provision that
Art. 181 governed only an application under the Civil
Procedure Code. The question raised ‘in that appeal
was, however, decided by the Supreme Court on the
merit of the case.and it was held that even if Art. 181
did apply to the application, it would still be within
time of the period of limitation of three years started
from the time when the right to apply accrued.

26. The law of limitation is intended to put an
end to litigation. It requires that persons must come to
Court and take recourse to legal remedies with due
diligence. The Limitation Act guillotines cases which
seek reliefs at a point of time which is beyond the
period specified thereunder. This is what has been
exactly propounded in Para 309, Halsbury's Law of
England (4) as to an application to rectify a share
register which must be made promptly. In this
connection I have considered Articles 48, 49, 120,
158, 178 of the Limitation Act. Last mentioned two
Articles govern appeals and applications respectively
under the Arbitration Act. Analogy to these Articles
does not provide any indication that applications under
Art. 181, which provide for residuary matters, also
include an application under any other law than the
Civil Procedure Code. Moreover, when the statute has
remained silent, I do not think this Court should
travel beyond its fixed path to lay down a law bringing
an application under sec. 38, Companies Act, within
the ambit of the residuary Art. 181. I am, therefore, of
the view that applications under Art. 181 are restricted
to applications under the Civil Procedure Code and
that the application for rectification of a share-register
under s. 38 is left to be governed by the general
principle that it shall be filed within a reasonable time
and not after inordinate delay. What is-a reasonable .
time or an inordinate delay is left to be determined by
the Court on consideration of facts and circumstances
of a particular case. Two decisions of the High Court
Division, given by two different Benches, have been
cited before us. In one decision a period of six years,
and in the other, a period of ten years were considered
to be reasonable time within which an application for
rectification of share-register should be filed.
Contention as to limitation as urged by Mr.
Rafique-ul-Hugq is therefore rejected.

27. I shall conclude by saying that the alleged
transfer of the respondent's shares rests entirely upon:
the letter Ext. L for proof. This letter, considered
along with the appellant's letter Ext.6, is found to be
vague, ambiguous and inscrutable and as such it is not
an ‘admission’. Finding to this effect of the courts
below is perfectly correct. All these appeals are
therefore dismissed with costs.


            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Criminal)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | State............ Appellant
ATM Afzal J, Mustafa  |
Kamal J and Latifur   | 	Vs.
Rahman J. 		    |
Judgment 		    | Abdus Sattar and others...
August 9, 1990. 	    |.... Accused-Respondents*
Constitution of Bangladesh 1972
Article 103

Where serious defect in the findings of fact given
by the High Court Division is discovered and the same
are considered not tenable then it should be open to the
Appellate Division to come to its own independent
finding upon a re-examination of the evidence
untrammelled by the opinion the court appealed from.
Noora Vs. State PLD 1973 (SC) 469 ref. .....(17)

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 154

FIR can be used only to corroborate or contradict
the maker thereof. There is neither any law nor any
principle on the basis of which the testimony of another
witness can be ignored or rejected because the informant
had made an omission to mention about the fact which
the witness stated in his deposition.

Section 439

The High Court Division sitting in appeal was
bound to give due weight to the opinion of the Trial
Court with regard to the credibility and demeanour of
the witmesses.	.... (21)

Evidence Act (I of 1877)
Section 5

Appreciation of evidence—if there is
contradiction of a substantial kind or a big difference
as to time as given by witnesses and proved by other
circumstances, then the time as to the occurrence may
become doubtful and the court can disbelieve the
prosecution case. The opinion of the doctor has been
so narrowly construed as would betray even ordinary
common sense. Considering all aspects of the matter,
there has been a manifest disregard of the accepted

*Criminal Appeal No. 30 0f 1986.

(From the Judgement and Order dated 20.5.85
passed by the High Court Division, Barisal Bench, in
Criminal Appeal No. 9 of 1982.

principles of appreciation of evidence and consequently
a miscarriage of justice  ... (28, 31 & 33)

B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellant. —

Mainul Hosein, Advocate, Supreme Court,
Joinal Abedin, Advocate, Supreme Court with him,
instructed by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate
-on-Record — For the Respondents No. 1 and 3-4.

Ex-parte — Respondent No. 2.

Judgment

ATM Afzal J: This appeal by leave at the
instance of the State is from an order of acquittal
passed in appeal by the High Court Division.

2. The four(4) respondents along with six (6)
others were put on trial in the Court of the Sessions
Judge, Patuakhali in Sessions Case No. 213 of 1979.
The respondents were charged under section 302/34
and 201 of the Penal Code and the other accused (since
acquitted) were charged only under section 201 Penal
Code.

3. One Abdul Hakim Talukder, a resident of
village Jainkathi, PS Patuakhali, was alleged to have
been mardered by the respondents which gave rise to
the present case. PW 1, Abdur Rab Talukder is the
elder brother of deceased Abdul Hakim. They used to
live in separate houses in the same village. PW 1
Abdur Rab Talukder was the informant in this case
but he is not an eye-witness of the occurrence. He,
however, stated in his evidence that on Saturday, the
4th Sraban, 1386 BS corresponding to 21.7.79 his
brother Abdul Hakim went to Patuakhali for making
purchase in connection with the ensuing Eid.
Patuakhali is about 5 miles away from Jainkathi and
usually it takes 1-1 4 hours to travel the distance by
boat. In the afternoon of the same day, Abdul Hakim
was returning from Patuakhali in the company of PW
2, Ali Akbar Talukder and PW 3 Idris Talukder, his
co-villagers, and others.

4. Prosecution case as found from the evidence
of PW 2, Ali Akbar, an eye-witness of the occurrence,
is that he, Abdul Hakim, Idris Talukder and Emdad
Hawlader (respondent No. 3) and one Eusuf Boyati left
Patuakhali by a boat on way home before Asar prayer
time. He and Idris left the boat on the west bank of
Jainkathi Katakhali Khal and started for home towards
the south. Emdad and Abdul Hakim left the boat on

            
            the east bank of the khal. It was about Asar time,
according to the witness. PW 2 and PW 3 heard a hue
and cry coming from the east bank of the khal after
sometime and they saw the respondents dragging
Abdul Hakim towards the house of respondent Nurul
Haque to the east by putting a Gamcha on his neck.
On sceing this PWs 2 and 3 ran to the house of PW 1
Abdur Rab and informed him what they had scen.
Then PW 1 along with PWs 2 and 3, Abdul Hai (PW
11), Salam Sarder (PW 7), Kalam (PW 9) Fazar, Arab
Ali (PW 4) and others went to the house of Nurul
Haque and found the respondents and others standing
in the yard of Nurul Haque in wet clothes. On the
query of PW 1, the respondents asked him why he had
come with brat (tricks). PW 1 and his companions,
however, started to search and saw the sign of dragging
something from the northern front of the house of
Nurul Haque upto the northem bank of the tank of his
house. Following the trail of dragging, the witnesses
looked into a ditch which was to the contiguous north
of the tank. They found the dead body of Abdul Hakim
under Water-hyacinth. Salam Sarder (PW 7) and Ensan
found the dead body which was carried to the north of
the house of Nurul Haque and kept there on the road.
The witnesses saw a black mark on the neck of the
dead body, Excepting a shirt and genji on the upper
part, the body was naked. So Abdul Hai put his
gamcha on the lower part of the body. Many people
came on hearing the hue and cry raised by the
witnesses and saw the dead body. The witnesses
narrated the occurrence to those who came there. After
Magreb PW I and others left for Patuakhali to lodge
the FIR. ;

5. PW 2 further stated in his evidence that out of
fear that the dead body might be taken away by, the
accused persons they removed the same to the thana
council road which is to the south of the house of
Nurul Haque at about 11-00 or 11-30 PM.

6. PW 1 lodged the FIR (Ext. 2) at 11 PM and
on the following morning the OC Patuakhali PS (PW
15) came to the locality and took up investigation of
the case. He held inquest on the dead body of Abdul
Hakim on the identification of the informant and
Others and sent the dead body to Patuakhali for post
Mortem examination through constable PW 14. On
completion of investigation PW 15 submitted

7. PW 6, Dr. Mogbul Hossain held post-mortem
examination of the dead body at about 2 PM on
22.7.79. He found several injuries on the person of
the deceased, haematoma, abrasion etc. and a
continuous ligature mark over the neck causing
extensive ecchymosis and extravassation of blood in
an around the wounds. Death, in his opinion, was due
to shock and haemorrhage as a result of the said
injuries which were antemortem and homicidal in
nature.

8. PW 1, Abdur Rab stated in his evidence that
the accused persons had murdered his brother because
of long standing enmity and grudge. They had two
pending cases against the accused and the deceased
used to make tadbir in those cases. In his FIR also he
narrated the entire occurrence in details naming the
respondents and alleging the aforesaid motive as the
cause of murder of his brother.

9. At the trial prosecution examined 9 witnesses
and tendered 6 others. Of them PWs 2-5 are
eye-witnesses of the occurrence. PWs 2 and 3 who
immediately before the occurrence had parted
company with the deceased saw the occurrence from
the west bank of the khal. PW 4 Arab Ali and PW 5
Arshed Ali, who are residents of the eastern bank of
the khal, saw the occurrence from there. Besides the
aforesaid witnesses, PWs 1, 7-9 and 11 went upto the
house of Nurul Haque immediately after hearing the
news that Abdul Hakim had been forcibly taken there
and it was PW 7, Salam Sarder who along with Ensan
ultimately brought out the dead body of Abdul Hakim
from the ditch. Other PWs are official and formal
witnesses.

10. The defence plea was that the respondents
had been falsely implicated in the case out of previous
enmity. It was also suggested that respondent No. 1
Abdus Sattar, who was a member of the Local Union
Parishad, tabled a no confidence motion along with
others against the sitting chairman Ishaque Mia at
whose behest the informant party had brought this —
case falsely.

11. The learned Sessions Judge upon a
consideration of the evidence on record, by his judgment
and order dated 31.5.82, found the respondents guilty
both under sections 302/34 and 201 Penal Code,
convicted them accordingly and sentenced each of them
to imprisonment for life under the first count and to
rigorous imprisonment for 5 years and a fine of Tk. 200,
in default, further RI for 6 months under the second
count. Six of the accused were, however, acquitted of the
charge under section 201 Penal Code.


            
            12. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment
and order the respondents took an appeal to the High
Court Division (Barisal Bench) being Criminal
Appeal No. 9 of 1982. By the impugned Judgment and
order dated 20 May 1985 a Division Bench allowed the
appeal, set aside the order of conviction and sentence
passed by the Trial Court and acquitted the respondents
of the charges brought against them.

13. Leave was granted to consider whether the
evidence of the eye-witnesses, as many as four in
number, was rightly discarded by the High Court
Division or in disregard to the accepted principles
regarding appreciation of evidence causing a
miscarriage of justice and whether the impugned
judgment was in violation of any established principle
of the administration of criminal justice.

14. The prosecution case apparently rests on the
direct evidence given by PWs 2-5 and the Trial Court
after examining all aspects of the case including the
credibility and demeanour of the witnesses found that
the prosecution had been able to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt. The High Court Division having
discarded the said considerable direct evidence upon
certain grounds which have been alleged to be not
legitimate and proper, it was felt that the matter
required looking into the evidence by this court in the
interest of public justice.

15. The learned Deputy Attorney-General
appearing for the State has submitted that the direct
and uniform evidence of as may as four eye-witnesses
have been discarded without any good reason and this
has caused a manifest failure of justice. He has argued
that the High Court Division was clearly, wrong in
discarding the evidence of PWs 4 and 5 on the ground
that the informant PW 1 did not state in the FIR that
they told him that they had scen the petitioners
dragging away deccased Abdul Hakim towards the
house of Nurul Hoque. He has also submitted that a
mechanical view was taken by the High Court
Division as to the time of occurrence which was not
justified and the opinion of the doctor as to the
possible time of occurrence ought not to have been
considered as something sacrosanct, ignoring the
evidence of the eye-witnesses and others who
uniformly proved that the occurrence had taken place
sometime before the evening.

16. Mr. Mainul Hosain, learned Advocate for
the respondents, has, however, supported the
impugned judgment and contended that believing or
not believing a witness is the function of a court of
fact and the High Court Division in appeal having
found it not possible to rely upon the alleged
eye-witnesses upon giving reasons, this court should
not, or at least be slow to upset the findings of fact, 
more so in a case of acquittal.

17. We are conscious that the present appeal is
from an order of acquittal and the mere fact that this
court might have taken a different view of the evidence
should not be a sufficient ground to overrule the
findings of fact of the appellate court. The inquiry in
this appeal however, will be if there has been any
serious defect in the process by which the findings
have been arrived at by the High Court Division. It is
now well-settled that where such defect is discovered
and the findings are not considered tenable then it
should be open to this court to come to its own
independent finding upon a re-examination of ‘the
evidence untrammelled by the opinion of the court
appealed from /Hamoodur Rahman CJ in Noora Vs,
State PLD 1973 (SC) 469].

18. The first objection which is taken against
the impugned judgment is that the learned Judges of
the High Court Division have put forward such a
ground for disbelieving PWs 4 and 5 (eye-witnesses),
and this was the only ground, which was plainly in
disregard of the accepted principles regarding the
appreciation of the evidence. Both these witnesses
claimed that they had scen the respondents dragging
away the deceased Abdul Hakim towards the house of
respondent Nurul Haque by putting a gamcha on his
neck. PW 4 Arab Ali who was inside his house at that
time was actually called out by PW 5, Arshed Ali who
first saw the dragging of the deceased. PW 4 came oul
of his house and obstructed the respondents but he was
driven away by some of the companions of the
respondents, PW 1, Abdur Rab, the informant, stated
in his evidence that after the recovery of the dead body
of Abdul Hakim from the ditch, PWs 4 and 5 informed
him and others that they had seen the dragging of
Abdul Hakim by the respondents. It has been notieed
that PWs 4 and 5 along with others accompanied PW
1 to the house of Nurul Haque and the recovery of the
dead body was made in their presence. PW 1, however
did not mention in the FIR that PWs 4 and 5 had
informed them that they had scen the dragging away of
Abdul Hakim by the respondents. The learned Judges
observed that there was no reason to omit this part 4
the story from the first information report and


            
            "accordingly we cannot place any reliance on the
statement of PWs. 4 and 5" It is well-established that
the FIR can be used only to corroborate or contradict
the maker thereof. There is neither any law nor any
principle on the basis of which the testimony of
another witness can be ignored or rejected because the
informant had made an omission to mention about the
fact which the witness stated in his deposition. To
reject the evidence of a witness only on such ground is
against the accepted norms of the administration of
criminal J ustice.

19. At another place of the judgment it has been
noticed that PW 1 admitted in cross-examination that
pWs 4, 5 and 7 were close relations of the wife of
deceased Abdul Halim. Although relationship has not
been mentioned as a ground for rejecting the
testimony of PWs 4 and 5 but mentioning of the fact
as.above suggests that this was also, perhaps, a
consideration for not belicving the witnesses. In the
first place, it is not correct that the said witnesses were
close relations of the deccase's wife. PW 1 stated in
cross-examination that Usman (PW 13) is the
grand-father-in-law of deceased Abdul Hakim and PW
4, Arab Ali is the brother of Usman. He also stated
that PW Insan is the wife's father's brother of the
deceased and PW 5, Arshed Ali is behai of PW Insan.

20. At this stage it may be pointed out as to
how the trial court considercd the question of
relationship of the witnesses. The Sessions Judge
noticed the defence contention that PWs 1-5 and 7
were inter-related and inimical to the respondents. The
learned Judge says that the contention is no doubt true
that all of them are not closely inter-related and that
the established principle of law is that the evidence of
witnesses cannot be disbelieved on the sole ground
that they are related to the parties. The approach made
by the Sessions Judge, it will be secn, was fully in
accord with the established principle regarding the
appreciation of evidence. He goes on to say "None of
them stated that they saw causing of the actual murder .
of the deceased, though some of them (had) scope to
Say so, if they had any intention to give false evidence.
In this connection I should also like to say that PW 5
Arshed Ali is an elderly man of 80 years. He is a
distant relation of the deceased through his wife. He
has got no enmity with the accused persons or any of
them. Even if I disbelieved other PWs. I have no
reason to disbelieve PW 5 Arshed Ali and onthe:
evidence of this witness alone, persons can be
punished."

21. The High Court Division sitting in appeal
was bound to give due weight, following the age-old
principle, to the opinion of the trial court with regard
to the credibility and demeanour of the witnesses.
This principle also has not been adhered to, it seems,
in the present case. The High Court Division
disbelieved PWs 4 and 5 merely because PW 1 failed
to mention in the FIR about their report as to the
dragging of the deceased by the respondents. The
learned Judges, apart from deviating from the norms
as pointed out above, failed to notice that in the FIR
the names of PWs 4 and 5 have been clearly
mentioned among the persons who had accompanied
PW 1 to the house of Nurul Haque. It is true that there
was an omission on the part of PW 1 in not
mentioning in the FIR that PWs 4 and 5 had informed
him that they had seen the dragging of Abdul Hakim.
This omission is of no consequence in the
circumstances of the case, because PW 1 stated in the
FIR that PWs 2 and 3, the other two eyc-witnesses
came running to his house and informed him that the
respondents had forcibly taken away the deceased
towards their house. On such information PW 1 along
with all the cye-witnesses and others started for the
house of Nurul Hoque.

22. Then the High Court Division disbclieved
the other two witnesses, PWs 2 and-3, saying "the
statements of these 2 witnesses also do not inspire
any confidence as the alleged hue and cry raised by
Abdul Hakim could not alert his neighbours including
his brother who live to the cast of the khal and near
the house of Nurul Huq". We find this logic to be
somewhat intriguing and misleading. There is no
evidence that the hue and cry raised by Abdul Hakim
did not attract his neighbours. At Ieast PWs 4 and 5, it
is on record, are among the persons who came from — -
the neighbourhood hearing hue and cry. The brother of
Abdul Hakim, PW 1, evidently did not hear the row
and he had to be informed by PWs 2 and 3. The other
reasons for disbclieving PWs 2 and 3 were that they
could not say the description of the land wherefrom
the victim was dragged away and that the Doctor did
not find any abrasion on the dead body of Abdul
Hakim except on the neck. It is really strange that any
court should disbelieve an eye-witness of the
occurrence merely becausc he fails to give the dag no.
etc. of the land where the occurrence takes place. In the
"present case it is all the more immaterial because the

            
            witnesses saw the act of dragging to which they
deposed and they are not supposed to know the
particulars of the land from where the dragging had
started. Absence of abrasion on the body of the
deceased (there were haemotomas) does not necessarily
disprove the fact of dragging or the testimony as to the
said dragging. It appears to us that the reasons given
by the learned Judges are not at all proper and
acceptable by any standard for rejecting the testimony
-of the witnesses. Indeed we are feeling concerned that
the High Court Division should have found it proper
to ignore the testimony of so many eye-witnesses
which is well-supported by other circumstances
proved in the case. For example, in the FIR lodged by
PW 1 within a few hours of the occurrence, 5 miles
away at Patuakhali, a vivid description has been given
of the entire occurrence disclosing the names of the
accused and the witnesses which completely agree
with the deposition of the witnesses in court.
Secondly, all the eye-witnesses have uniformly
spoken about dragging of the deceased by putting a
gamcha round his neck. The doctor PW 6 found a
continuous ligature mark over the neck of the
deceased. These and other circumstances lend
circumstantial corroboration to the evidence of
eye-witnesses.

23. Next, the leamed Judges found that there are
discrepancies in the statement of the prosecution
witnesses about the place where the dead body of
Abdul Hakim was kept just after the recovery. PW 1
said that after the recovery the dead body was kept to
the south of the front of the house of Nurul Huq. PW
‘2, on the other hand, said that they kept the dead body
to the north of the house of accused Nurul Huq. Other
PWs simply stated that the dead body was kept near
the house of the accused Nurul Huq. When PW 15, the
Investigating Officer, visited the place of occurrence,
he found the dead body on the Thana Council road. It is
found from the evidence of PW 1 that the Thana
Council road is about 100/125 cubits south of the
house of Nurul Hug. PW 12 Roshene Ali Chowkider
stated that after midnight he guarded the dead body on
the Thana Council Road.

24. It has not been noticed that the
eye-witnesses stated that after PW 1 had left for the PS
after Magreb, they removed the dead body to the Thana
Council road at 11 or 11-30'°M apprehending that the
accused persons might take away the same. From the
evidence it is clear that upon recovery the dead body
was first kept near the house of Nurul Huq on the Toad
which starts from his house and later on it was taken
to a little distance, 100/200 cubits a way and kept on *
the Thana Council Road which was considered to be
public place. There was no discrepancy of any major 
kind as to the place of keeping of the dead body for
which the account of the eye-witnesses may be said to
be doubtful.

25. The learned Judges then considered that as
regards the time of the occurrence "there are gross |
discrepancies in the statements of the Prosecution
witnesses in this respect". Is it an assessment on
correct principles?

26. The impugned judgment says "PW 1, the 
informant stated that deceased. Abdul Hakim was
dragged away at 6-30 PM which was about half an
hour before thé magreb prayer time. PW 2 Ali Akbar
who claimed that he was in the company of deceased
Abdul Hakim in the boat, stated that they started from
Patuakhali before Asar time and that they reached their
village at Asar time. PW 3 on the other hand stated
that they left Patuakhali at 5.00 pm. and after leaving
the boat he heard the hue and cry at about 6-30 pm.
PW 1 the informant and other PWs stated that the dead
body was recovered at 6-30 PM. So it is found that the
PWs made confused statements as regard the time of
occurrence."

27. It may be seen, by way of comparison, how
the Sessions Judge has dealt with this question of
lime of the occurrence, He says, "As regards, the
so-called contradiction regarding the time, it appears
that some of them stated to the IO that they saw the
dragging at "Asar" time and some saw the same at
6-30 PM. By no stretch of imagination it can be said
that they made any contradiction by making thesé
statements. We have seen that on the date Asar time
started at 4-40 PM and the "Magreb" time commenced 
after 6-50 PM. Asar time remaining Magreb Azan. —
Morcover, this witnesses did not see the occurrencé
with watches with them. All of them however stated
that the dead body was recovered before dusk. A slight
variation of time with reference to sun and watch
cannot be considered as fatal or material
contradiction."

28. The appreciation of evidence on this point
made by the learned Sessions Judge fully accords With
the usual tenets as are applicd in such matters. But the
same cannot be said in respect of the impugned
judgment. It is common knowledge that our rural

            
            people while referring to time depend on
approximation and it is not gencrally expected of them
to be absolutely precise. Therefore, in assessing the
time factor in a given case the court must examine the
matter upon a broad and practical view. If there is a
contradiction of a substantial kind or there is a big
difference as to time as given by witnesses and proved
by other circumstances, then the time as to the
occurrence may become doubtful and the court can
disbelieve the Prosecution case. In the present case it
cannot be said that the contradictions referred to by the
High Court Division are so big and so glaring that.the
witnesses can be said to have made "confused
statements". Of the two companions of the deceased
PW 2 stated in cross-examination that they had left
Patuakhali before Asar prayer time. PW 3 Idris,
however, said at about 5 PM. PW 2 stated in chief that
they left the boat reaching Jainkathi "at as per Asar
time". He stated to the IO that at about 6-30 PM he
saw the dragging of Abdul Hakim. PW 1 said in
cross-examination that it was about 6-30 PM and
before Magreb when PWs 2 and 3 came to his house
and‘ informed him. PW 3 Idris. stated in
cross-examination that after about 5 an hour of
picking up. of the dead body from the ditch the
Muazzeen gave the Azan for Magreb prayer. PW 2,
Ali Akbar stated in chief that after Magreb PW 1 and
others left for the PS to lodge the FIR.

29. It is in the evidence that the house of the
respondents, the informant and the deceased are not
very far away from the Katakhali khal and the houses
are in. close proximity. PW 1 stated in
cross-examination that the deceased used to live
100/125 cubits to the east of the Khal and the bari of
accused Nurul Huq is also 200/250 cubits to the cast
of the Khal. Deceased Abdul Hakim uscd to live in a
‘bari 120/150 cubits to the north of his bari.

30. Taking all the evidence together it is
reasonable to hold that the deceased along with his’
companions left Patuakhali sometime before Asar and
reached their village Jainkathi around 5-30 to 6 PM
when the occurrence took place on the east bank of the
khal. The statements made by the witnesses as to the
time of dragging of the deceased by the respondents go _
to show that it was very late in the afternoon that the
occurrence had taken place which was quite consistent
with the other parts of the prosecution ¢ case that the
deceased had left Patuakhali before Asar time and his.
dead body. was ‘Tecovered from the ditch behind the
house of the respondents little before Magreb prayer
time.

31. The extent of breach of the ordinary norms
will be further seen from the fact that the High Court
Division held, upon the opinion of the doctor PW 6 in
cross-examination that the person might have been
murdered 24 to 30 hours before he held the PM
Examination that "this fact disproved the prosecution
story of killing Abdul Hakim at 6-30 PM”. The Post
Mortem examination was held at 2 PM on 22.7.79
and the occurrence, according to the prosecution, took
place around 6 PM on 21.7.79. The High Court
Division relying on the aforesaid opinion of the
doctor observed that the murder took place between 8
AM and 2 PM on 21.7.79. The opinion of the doctor
has been so narrowly construcd as would betray even
ordinary common sense. It has not been noticed that
the doctor has qualified his opinion by saying 'might
have' and it is ordinary prudence that such opinion is
always subject to some margin and it cannot exactly
fix the time of occurrence. We are of the view that the
learned Judges misdirected themselves by taking such
a narrow and technical view of the evidence in
disregard'to the ordinary norms.

32. We have ourselves looked into the entire
evidence carefully. It is true that the parties were at
daggers drawn because of enmity between them due to
various litigations. PW 1 himself admitted that in
Sessions Case No. 105 of 1975 brought by Soharab,
brother of Nurul Huq, he was an accused along with
deceased Abdul Hakim. He admitted of another cattle
lifting case in which he along with the deceased and
others were in hajot. PW 4 admitted that Nurul Huq
deposed against him in the cattle lifting case. So,
there was both motive for murder and cause for false
implication of the respondents. In this context, we
had to consider .the worth of the evidence adduced,
particularly those of the eye-witnesses., Upon a
reference to the evidence of the Investigating Officer
PW 15, we do not find any contradiction on any
material point nor is there any such contradiction
among the witnesses inter se. The evidence of the
eye-witnesses are’ corroborated by PW 1 and 7. PW 1
himself is fully corroborated by his FIR. There is no
good reason to reject the evidence of the eye-witnesses
who have given uniform evidence as to the dragging
of the deceased by the respondents soon after he had
landed on the-east bank of the khal after his journey
from Patuakhali. The recovery of the dead body soon

            
            thereafter makes the Prosecution case more credible. It
seems that when the occurrence took place the
witnesses were giving the time of hearing of huc and
cry as at 6-30 PM but at the trial they were referring to
that fact with reference to Asar time. It has already
been considered that the difference of time was not so
big or glaring as would make the prosecution case
doubtful.

33. Considering all aspects of the matter, we
have come to the conclusion that there has been
serious defect in the process by which the High Court
Division came to its findings, that there has been a
manifest disregard of the accepted principles of
appreciation of evidence and consequently there has
occurred a miscarriage of justice. We agree with the
Trial Court that the prosecution has been able to bring
home the charges against the respondents beyond all
reasonablc doubt.

34. It is clear from the evidence that the
respondents forcibly took away the deceascd from the
road with the common intention of causing death to
him and in fact killed him cither by themselves or in
association with others. In any case, their liability for
the murder is well-proved. We arc satisfied that the
evidence on record is sufficient both in quality and
quantity to justify an order of conviction. They have
been wrongly acquiltcd.

35. In the result, therefore, the impugned
judgment and order are set aside. The order of
conviction under sections 302/34 and 201 Penal Code
as passed against the respondents by the Sessions
Judge is restored, The sentence of imprisonment for
life for cach of the respondent is also restored but the
separate sentence under section 201 is sct aside. The
respondents are directed to surrender forthwith and
_ Serve out the sentence imposed upon them,

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)




MH Rahman J, ATM Afzal J,   | Hussain Mohammad
Mustafa Kamal J and Latifur | Ershad........ Petitioner
Rahman J, 			    | Vs.
Judgment 			    | The State...
February 26, 1991. 	    |..........Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 561A

It has been asserted that the FIR itself was lodged
by the complainant after receiving an order from the
Home Ministry and not on his own. A prosecution
cannot be quashed just because it was initiated at the
instance of the Home Ministry.

The question of possession can only be decided
on evidence and not on submission on law as to what
constitutes possession. The question whether the
proceeding should be quashed or not should be decided
on facts alleged in the FIR and charge-sheet. The
accused's gencral denial that the facts disclosed in the
FIR are not true will not do. To succeed the accused
must show that the facts alleged by the prosecution, do
not constitute any offence or that the prosecution is
otherwise barred by law.

Sudhanya Bawali & others Vs. Emperor 18 Cr. Law
Journal 781 & Krishna Gopal Vs. Emperor 92 IC 589
distinguished.

Moinul Huq, Advocate, (Kazi Shahadat Hossain,
Advocate with him), instructed by Mohammad Ayub,
Advocate-on-Record— For the Petitioner.

Aminul Huq, Attorney-General, (AW Bhuiyan,

. Additional Attorney-General with him), instructed by

B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the

Respondent. ;

“Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 14 of

“1991.

(From the judgment and order dated 14th
Fobruary, 1991 passed by tha High Court Division.
Dhaka in Criminal Revision No. 142 of 1991 (arising
out of Special Tribunal Case No, 60 of 1991 now
pending in the Court of Senior Special Tribunal
Judge, Dhaka), ;

The Judgment in the Revision Case in:

affirmed.


            
            Judgment

MH Rahman J: This petition for leave to
appeal is directed against the judgment and order of the
High Court Division dated 14th February, 1991
passed in Criminal Revision No. 142 of 1991
refusing to quash the proceedings of Special Tribunal
Case No. 60 of 1991 now pending in the Court of
Senior Special Tribunal Judge, Dhaka.

2. The petitioner, Hussain Mohammad Ershad,
is a former President of the country. He resigned from
the post of the President of the Republic on 6th
December, 1990 and from then on till 12th December,
1990 he was staying in Sena Bhaban in Dhaka
Cantonment where he had been residing from kefore a
long time. The FIR case is that an order dated 11th
December, 1990 under the Special Powers Act, 1974
for his detention was scrved on him on 12th
December, 1990 and he was taken from the Sena
Bhaban to a house, House No. 10 Road No. 84 in
Gulshan Model Town. On that date the Log Arca
Commander constituted a Board for taking possession
of the Sena Bhaban. On 13th December, 1990 two
more members were included in that Board. At 3-40
PM on that day the members of the Board visited the
Sena Bhaban and found it under seal and protected by
guards. They were informcd that the house was sealed
immediately with the petitioner's departure. After
opening two rooms some wearing apparels of the
petitioner and his family were handed over to the
petitioner's representative, Mostafizur Rahman. On
15th December, 1990 by an order of the Home
Ministry a committee was constituted with cight
members for an inventory of the petitioner's personal
effects and other articles supplied to him by different
ministries and were kept in the Sena Bhaban. After
examining the report of the committee it appeared to
_ the Government that there were eight unlicensed arms
and some ammunition in the list of articles prepared
by that committee. It was further stated in the FIR that
on the 24th December, 1990 the petitioner's
representative, Mostafizur Rahman, produced four
unlicensed pistols and reported that those unlicensed
pistols along with four other licensed arms were
brought to his residence by the petitioner's mother-in-
law. In these circumstance the first information report
was lodged on.5.1.1991 under section 19A and (f) of
the Arms Act, 1878 read with section 26 of the
Special Powers Act, 1974. The police submitted a
charge-sheet on. 26.1.1991. The Senior Special
Tribunal Judge, Dhaka took cognizance in the matter
on 30th January,1991 and fixed 16th February, 1991
for the framing of charge.

3. The petitioner filed an application under
section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure
before the High Court Division for quashing the
proceeding. It was contended before the High Court
Division that the arms were not recovered from the
possession of the petitioner who was admittedly under
detention and kept confined in a house in Gulshan
Model Town at the relevant time, and the Sena
Bhaban, the place of recovery, was neither in his
possession nor under his control and that several
persons had in fact access to that house; that the Sena
Bhaban was the official residence of the President and
the arms were not owncd by the petitioner and they
were Government properties being gifts from foreign
heads of governments, and described as such; that
under Rule 3 with the Schedule 1, Clause 1(a) of the
Arms Rules,1924 the petitioner as a former president
is exempted from the relevant provisions of the Arms
Act, 1878; and that admittedly the arms were
surrendered and /or delivered to the Deputy
Commissioner of Police (North) and the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, on 24th December, 1990
i.e. within the period of amnesty declared by the
Government.

4. In discharging the rule issued in the matter the
High Court Division held that the question of
possession of the arms, whether the petitioner enjoys
the exemptions from having licence in respect of all
the arms seized, and whether the case of the petitioner
falls within the immunity and the petitioner is
entitled to avail of the scope of amnesty are questions
of fact and be decided at the time of the trial on
evidence and on comparison and verification of the
seized arms with those that are exempted under the
rules.

5. The two learned Counsels have appeared
before us for the petitioner. Apart from reiterating the
contentions raised before the High Court Division
they have urged a new ground. -

6. It is contended that the arms seized were in the
possession and control of the petitioner in: his
capacity as President and hence in view of Article 52
(1) of the Constitution there is a complete bar against
any criminal prosecution against the petitioner. We
find no substance in this contention. The immunity


            
            is available to the President while he is in office.

7. With regard to the alleged amnesty no paper
was produced before the High Court Division. No
paper in this regard has been placed before us, cither,
Whether the arms in question were surrendered in
response to the amnesty or recovered by the law
enforcing agencies is a question of fact and can only be
decided at the trial.

8. With regard to the petitioner's contention that
he is entitled to keep the seized arms as a former
president of the country all emphasis has been laid on
the size of the bore of ‘the pistols. The question
whether the seized arms satisfy the requirements for an
exemption, as laid down in Table 1 of Schedule 1 to
the Arms Rules, 1924, should better be left for
decision to the trial judge who will have the benefit of
the opinion of the arms expert, cited as a witness in
the charge-shect, and not in this summary proceeding
under section 561A- of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

9. The High Court Division correctly interpreted
the principles laid down in Farruk Ahmed Vs. Abdul
Kader Chowdhury, 38 DLR (AD) 18, Hasanuddin
Sarkar Vs. The State, 34 DLR 287, Abdul Quader
Chowdhury Vs. The State, 28 DLR (AD) 38,
Bangladesh Vs. Tan Kheng Hock, 31 DLR (AD) 69,
Abdul Ali Vs. The State, 30 DLR (SC) 58 and Akhtar
Rahim Vs. State & others, 35 DLR .100.

10. Two more decisions have been cited before
us in support of the petitioner's contention that the
arms were not seized from his possession, In
Sudhanya Bawali & others Vs. Emperor 18 Crl.. Law
Journal 781 a gun was found in an abandoned room of
a joint family house belonging to three accused who
jointly managed the affairs of the joint family and
exercised equal rights, and the room was accessible
from outside. It was held that the accused could not be
convicted under section 19 (b) of the Arms Act.

11. In Krishna Gopal Vs. Emperor 92 IC 589 a
pistol and a number of cartridges were found in a room
attached to the office of a certain Society, rented in the
name of the accused, who was not present at the time
of the search, but the key of the office had been made
over..by him to one ofthe three members of the
Society who were present during the search. It was
sheld that it could not be said that it had been proved
beyond reasonable doubt that the seized articles were
in’ possession of the.accused. These two decisions
were made after the trial and not in pre-trial
procecdings like the instant one. The question of
possession can only be decided on evidence and not on
submissions on law as to what constitutes
possession.

12. It has been emphatically asserted that the
proceeding has been launched for malafide purpose as
it will be scen from the FIR itself which was lodged
by the complainant after recciving an order from the
Home Ministry and not on his own. A short answer to
this is that a prosccution cannot be quashed just
because it was initiated at the instance of the Home
Ministry.

13. It appears the prosecution is kcen to
expedite the trial.In a summary procecding under
section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure the
question whether the proceeding should be quashcd or
not should be decided on the facts alleged in the FIR
and the charge-sheet. The accused's gencral denial that
the facts disclosed in the FIR are not true will not do.
To succeed the accused must show that the facts
alleged by the prosecution do not constitute any
offence or that the prosecution is otherwise barred by
law. Upon scrutiny of the FIR and the charge-shcet of
the instant case it can not be said that the procecding
is barred by any law or that, prima facie, it does not
attract the provision of the Arms Act, 1878.
Accordingly, the petition is dismissed.
Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

MH Rahman J, ATM Azima    | Begum..........
Afzal J, Mustafa KamalJ   | ......Appellant
and Latifur Rahman J. Vs. |
  				  | Yusuf Khan (Md) and
Judgment 			  | others.....
February 14,1990. 	  | .....Respondents*

Code of Criminal, Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 439

Refusal of prayer for ad-interim stay while
issuing’ Rule in criminal revision, When appellant
clearly stated before the High Court Division while
obtaining the Rule that she gave birth to a child just
five months ago and it would be injurious to her
health as also to the baby if both were to be placed
under any type of custody at that critical stage it was
not a judicious and sound exercise of discretion to
refuse the said stay. ....(11)

Aminul Huq, Advocate-on-Record—For the
Appellant.

Jamiruddin Sircar, Senior Advocate instructed by
Mad. Sajjadul Huq, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 1.

B. Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General instructed
by Mr. Zinnur Ahmed, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent No. 2 (State).

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: This appeal by special
leave is directed against an order dated 25.9.86 passed
by a Division Bench of the High Court Division,
Dhaka refusing the prayer for ad-intcrim stay while
issuing the Rule in Criminal Revision No. 375 of
1986.

2. Respondent No. 1 lodged a First Information
Report with Boalia Police Station, Rajshahi alleging
that on 30.6.85 at 11-00 AM. one Md. Aslam Sarker
forcibly kidnapped his minor sister, the appellant, on
her way to school and was wrongly confined against

*Criminal Appeal No. 43 of 1986. * sian

(From the Judgment and order dated 25.9.86
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Criminal
Revision No. 375.of 1986). .

her will and was not allowed to return to her father's
house whereupon GR Case No. 329 of 1985 was
started against the said Md. Aslam Sarker under
section 366 of the Penal Code. On 7.7.85 Md. Aslam
Sarker and the appellant were arrested, but were later
released on bail by the City Magistrate, Rajshahi. The
appellant was allowed to go with him, After getting
the appellant examined by the Civil Surgeon,

Rajshahi, Md. Aslam Sarker produced a medical

certificate before the investigating officer showing the
age of the appellant at 18 years. Relying upon the
samc the investigating officer submitted a final report
on 30.7.85.

3. Respondent No. 1 filed an application before
the City Magistrate on 4.8.85 praying for
re-examination of the appellant by a medical board,
alleging the exercise of unduc influence upon the
Civil Surgeon,Rajshahi by Md.Aslam Sarker.On
5.8.85 the City Magistrate rejected the prayer and at
the same time declining to accept the final report
directed a judicial inquiry by a Magistrate, 2nd Class.

4. Against thc order directing a judicial inquiry
Md. Aslam Sarker successively filed without success
Criminal Motion No. 176 of 1985 before the
Sessions Judge, Rajshahi, Criminal Revision No.
117 of 1985 before the Rangpur Bench of the High
Court Division and Criminal Petition for Special
Leave to Appeal No. 49 of 1986 before the Appellate
Division. The learned Sessions Judge, Rajshahi
ordered further investigation into the matter which
was upheld upto the Appellate Division.

5. Against the City Magistrate's order of
rejection of praycr for re-examination of the appellant
by a medical board, respondent No. 1 filed Criminal
Motion No. 177 of 1985 before the Sessions Judge,
Rajshahi who by order dated 1.10.85 directed that the
appellant should remain in the custody of her lawyer
surcty ic. Md. Mujibur Rahman Chowdhury,
Advocate and that if the learned Advocate refused to
take the custody of the appellant, she should be taken
into judicial custody. Further, the appellant would be :
examined by a medical board to be constituted by the
Combined Military Hospital, Bogra Cantonment.

6. Against the said order the appellant then
preferred on 7.9.86 Criminal Motion No. 235 of 1986
before:the Sessions J udge, Rajshahi stating that she
was sui juris having attained the age of 16 years. She
married the said Md. Aslam Sarker on 30.6.85 out of

            
            her own free will and volition. They are since living as
man and wife. The marriage has been consummated
and she has given birth to a female child on 18.4.86.
By order dated 17.9.86 the Icarned Scssions Judge in
modification of his earlier order dated 1.10.85 directed
the appellant to be in custody of the said Mr.Mujibur
Rahman Chowdhury along with her newly-bom child
and in case the learned Advocate declines to be the
custodian, the appellant shall be taken into judicial
custody. The order of re-examination of the appellant
by a medical board was not modified. It remained as it
was on 1.10.85.

7. Against the order dated 17.9.86 the appellant
preferred Criminal Revision No. 375 of 1986 and
obtained a Rule on 25.9.86 from a Division Bench of
the High Court Division, Dhaka which, however,
refused to grant the prayer for ad-intcrim stay of
impugned order. The appellant obtained a leave against
the order of rejection of the prayer for ad-interim stay.

8. Leave was grantcd to consider the appellant's
contentions — (i) that the birth of a baby completcly
changed the character of the case and the Icarned Judges
of the High Court Division ought to have stayed the
operation of the order dated 17.9.86; and (ii) that if the
appellant along with her newly-born child was ordered
at the post-natal critical stage to remain in judicial
custody then her health as well as the health of the
baby would greatly suffer.

9. Since the leave was granted in November,
1986, more then three years have passcd. The
appellant's child is now nearly four years old. Mr.
Aminul Huq, Icarned Advocate-on-Record for the
appellant, submits that it will be an act of shcer
harassment to the appellant if she is now required to
Stay with her four years old child in the custody of the
learned Advocate or in judicial custody. :

10. Mr. Jamiruddin Sircar, learned Counsel for
the respondent No. 1, submits that ever since 1.10.85
the appellant has been avoiding re-examination by a
medical board for determination of her age. In the
interest of a fair disposal of the matter the appellant
should be directed to submit herself to the medical
board for re-examination, he submits.

11. It appears that the appellant clearly stated
before the High Court Division while obtaining ‘the
Rule that she had given birth to a female child barely 5
months ago and that it would be injurious:to. the
health of the baby and the appellant both to be placed
under any type of custody at that critical Stage. The
High Court Division ought to have appreciated that
in such circumstance the opcration of the impugned
order conccming custody would have spelt disaster to
both the baby and the mother. In that view of that
matter the exercise of discretion in not granting an
order of ad-interim stay was not a judicious and sound
exercise of discretion at all.

12. Whether the appellant should undergo a re-
examination by a medical board for the purpose of
determining her age is a matter which the High Court
Division may consider while disposing of the Rule,
as it is clear from the revisional application that the
appellant was equally aggricved by the learned
Sessions Judge's refusal to modify the order dated
1.10.85 concerning re-examination and the parties
will be at liberty to take such steps as advised for
hearing of the Rule.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed.
Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Rahima Khatun (Mst)
MH Rahman J, ATM Afzal J | & others....Appellants
and Mustafa Kamal J.     | Vs.
Judgment                 | Dally Rani Dasi.........
July 17,1990             |.........Respondent*

Words and Phrases

Dakhalkar—what it stands for—ordinarily the
word "Dakhalkar" in the record of right is no doubt
indicative of a -mere tenant-at-will without any
transferable or heritable interest, but the word cannot
be limited to a mere tenant-at-will under all
circumstances. The subsequent history and the
attendent circumstances are relevant facts to be taken
into consideration in determining the character of
possession. The use of the word Dakhalkar in the CS
record is not conclusive. .

Prodyut Sen Gupta Vs. Nagendra Kumar Chy. 52

CWN 72; A Casperz Vs. Kader Nath Sharbadhikari ILR 28 
Cal 738 approved in Afzal-Un-Nessa Vs. Abdul Karim ILR
47 Cal 1 (PC) Naba Kumar Debi Vs. Behari Lal Sen. ILR
34Cal902(PC) tens (11-15).

 MH Khandker, Senior Advocate, Lutfar Rahman
Mondal & A J Mohammad Ali, Advocates with him,
instructed by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record
—For the Appellants. ;

 Golam Rabbani, Senior Advocate instructed by
Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record—¥or the
Respondent.

Judgment
Mustafa Kamal J: This appeal by special
leave by the defendant-appellants is from the second
appellate judgment and decree dated 10.12.84 passed
by a leamed Single Judge of the High Court Division,
Rangpur Bench in Second Appeal No. 162 of 1974
Setting aside the Judgment and decree of the learned
Subordinate Judge, Rajshahi in Title Appeal No. 23
of 1971 dated 13.12.72 and restoring those of the

Civil Appeal No. 150f1986.
(From-the Judgment and Decree dated 10.12.84
passed by the High Court Division, Randpur Bench in
Second Appeal No. 162 of 1974).


learned Munsif, Rajshahi Sadar dated 25.8.70 in Title
Suit No. 59 of 1967, decreeing the suit.

2. The plaintiff-respondent filed the suit for
declaration of title and recovery of khas possession of
the suit land against appellant No. 1 and the
predecessor-in-interest of the other appellants. She
produced evidence that one Giribala Baishnabi was the
recorded tenant as' Dakhalkar' of the suit land situated
within Rajshahi Municipality in CS record; Ext. 11.
Shc constructed a house thereon which is standing till
today. She gifted her interest in favour of her foster
son Gopal Chandra Ghosh by a registered deed of gift
(Ext, 5) on the 23rd Poush, 1326 BS corresponding to
6.6.1919. Gopal was recognised by the landlord as a
tcnant and he was given rent receipts Ext. 6.6 (a).
Gopal sold the suit land to Brojendra Nath Goswami
by a registered sale deed, Ext, 9 dated the 27th Ashar,
1337 BS corresponding to 12.7.30. Brojendra was
also recognised by the landlord as a tenant and was
granted rent receipts, Ext. 6 (b)-6 (h). Brojendra paid
municipal taxes too vide reccipts Exts. 2-2 (i). After
the death of Brojendra his two sons Biswanath
GoaqMI ns Benoy who gifted the suit land to the
land. The plaintiff and her husband were disciples of
Biswanath and Benoy who gifted the suit land to the
plaintiff-respondent by a registered deed of gift, Ext. 1
dated 6.3.61 which was executed and registered by her
husband PW 4 Shambhu Nath Das by virtue of a
power of attorney Ext. 3 granted to him by Biswanath ©
and Benoy. One Shyam Sundar Das was a monthly
tenant in the suit premises under Brojendra. He used to
run a biscuit factory in the eastern side and reside at
the western side of the premises. He sold away the
movables to PW 6 Probhash Chandra Pal on
19.11.58 and left for India. The plaintiff-respondent
took possession of the suit property after the gift on
6.3.61 and the said PWs 4 and 6 used to run the
biscuit factory. The defendant-appellants forcibly
entered into the western part of the house on the Ist

Sravan, 1369 BS corresponding to 17.7.62 and hence
the suit filed in 1967.

3. The defendant-appellants denied the
plaintiff-respondent's title to the suit land. It was their
case that Giribala Baishnabi was a tenant-at-will and
she had no transferable and heritable right. On the
death of Giribala the municipal holding became khas
of the Dangapara estate. Thercafter all the transfers by
Giribala's successors were made without the consent
of the Dangapara landlord. The paintiff-respondent's

            
            stories of gift, sale, inheritance and payment of rent
and municipal taxes were all denied and the papers
were alleged to be forged. The appellants, further case
is that the landlord granted one mokarrary patta of the
suit land Ext. F on 13.6.39 in favour of one
Shantikana Maitra who in terms of the authorization
in the patta itself ejected all the tcnants-at-will,
constructed tin shed and lived for some time therein.
Then she let out the holding to Shyamsundar Das.
Thus the same Shyamsundar Das is claimed to be the
tenant of Brojendra by the plaintiff-respondent whereas
the defendant-appcllants claim him to be a tenant of
Shantikana.. It is the further case of the
defendant-appellants that Shantikana sold the suit land
by a registered deed in favour of the appellants on
7.1.57, Ext. A. Shyamsundar voluntarily surrendered
possession of the suit premises to the defendants on
the 8th Agrahayan, 1365 BS and delivered possession
of the dwelling room in their favour, but the wily PW
6 Prabhash Chandra Pal in whose custody
Shyamsundar kept the movables sct up the plaintiff's
husband PW 4 Shambhu Nath Das and manufactured
papers to deprive the defendants of the fruit of their
purchase.

4. On the finding that Gopal and later Brojendra
were both recognised by the landlord as tenants, that
the two sons of Brojendra validly gifted the suit land to
the plaintiff-respondent and that there is no iota of
evidence that Shantikana took possession of the
disputed land by ejecting the tenants and re-built the
house after demolishing the old one, the Trial Court
decreed the suit.

5. On appeal the first Appellate Court held that
Giribala was a merc tenant-at-will who had no
transferable and heritable interest in the land and by
merely allowing her to stay on the suit Jand for a long
lime no title was conferred on her ipso facto. The deed
of gift Ext. 5 could not convey any interest to the
alleged donce Golap Ghosh. Giribala had at best a
tenancy right in the disputed land and that right was for
year to year. Golap was granted some dakhilas but
after the execution of the Patta Ext. F no dakhila was
granted in his favour nor did he pay any rent to
Shantikana. Golap could not have been considered as a
tenant from year to-ycar holding over. The first
Appellate Court noticed and accepted as important the
recital in the patta, Ext. F to the effect that the present
occupants of the disputed land were mere
tenants-at-will. Shantikana was given the right to
evict them. The first Appellate Court held Without
however discussing the evidence that the appellants
did not come to possess the suit land forcibly but
delivery of possession was handed over to them
amicably. The suit was, therefore, dismissed.

6. The High Court Division found that both
Gopal and Brojendra were recogniscd as tenants by the
landlord. The Icarned Judge opincd that the materia]
question was whether Shyamsundar was a tenant under
Brojendra or under Shantikana. From the first
Appellate Court's failure to reverse the finding of fact
by the Trial Court that there was no iota of evidence
that Shantikana ever cjected any tenants and ever
rebuilt the house after demolishing the old onc, the
Icarned Judge held that the judgment of the first
Appellate Court is not a proper judgment of reversal,
The judgment and decree of the first Appellate Court
were set aside and those of the Trial Court were
restored.

7. The sole basis of Giribala's interest is an
entry in the CS record, Ext. 11 showing Giribala as
‘Dakhalkar’. No evidence of her title was granted to
consider whether in such circumstances the
subsequent deeds of transfer, namely, Exts. 5 and 6
have any basis and as to whether the finding of fact
arrived at by the first Appellate Court should have
been interfered with by the High Court Division in
second appeal.

8. Mr. MH Khandker, the Icarned Counsel for
the defendant-appellants, submits that a CS khatian,
or, in other words, a record of rights, is not a
document of title. It docs not create or extinguish title
to land. At best, along with other evidence, it may
support an evidence of title. He has cited the cases of
Lal Miah Vs. Haji Md. Ibrahim Meah and_ others, 28
DLR (AD) 61, Pankajeni Debi Vs. Sudhir Dutta, 60
CWN 793 and Kazi Md. Hossain Vs. Sree Ram
Banda, 70 CWN 1066 in support of his submission.
He further submits that the word ' Dakhalkar ' in the
CS khatian Ext, 11 merely shows that Giribala was a
tenant-at-will and that she had no transferable and
heritable right. Her alleged gift to her foster son Gopal
by Ext. 5 and Gopal's subsequent sale to Biswanath
Ext..9 had conveyed no interest to the donee and
transferee. Consequently the plaintiff-responden!
obtained nothing from Biswanath and Benoy by way
of gift, and she is bercft of any title to the suit land
Mr. Khandker has relied upon the case of Bipradas Pal
Choudhury Vs. Azam Ostagar, 22 CWN CX

            
            (Notes) and submit that scction 105 of the Bengal
Tenancy Act does not apply to non-agricultural lands
situated in mofussil municipality. Giribala could have
a transferable and heritable right in the suit land only if
there was a registered leasc in her favour in terms of
section 107 of the Transfer of Property Act. Mr.
Khandaker submits that the Judge of the High Court
Division did not consider this aspect of the case.
Hence an interference with the finding of fact of the
first Appellate Court was not warranted under the
circumstances,

9. Mr. Golam Rabbani, the learned Counsel for
the plaintiff-respondent on, the other hand, docs not
dispute the proposition that a record of rights is not a
document of title. He, however, contends that from
the surrounding circumstances, a case of permancnt
tenancy has been made out.

10. Some findings of the Trial Court, we find,
remain unrevised by the first Appellate Court,
namely, that Giribala constructed a house on the suit
land, that there is no evidence that Shantikana
demolished the same and constructed a new one and
that she lived therein and later inducted her own tenant.
The unrevised finding of the Trial Court establishes
the fact that after Giribala's possession of the suit land
Gopal possessed the same from 6.6.1919, the date of
gift Ext. 5, upto 12.7.1930, the date of sale to
Brojendra Ext. 9. During these long years Gopal paid
rent to the landlord which was accepted . There is no
evidence that the landlord took any step to evict Gopal
. Thereafter Brojendra obtained possession by purchase
from Gopal on 12.7.30, paid rent to the landlord and
‘also paid municipal taxes. He was succeeded by his
two sons Biswanath and Benoy who possessed the
-same through tenant Shyamsundar Das. Then they
gifted the suit land to the plaintiff-respondent on
6.3.61 Ext.-i. Brojendra and his two sons were in
possession of the suit land for long 31 years and there
is no evidence that the landlord sought to evict them in
any way. The landlord allegedly settled the suit land to,
Shantikana in :1939 by a dubious transaction of
granting a Patta; Ext. F which itself does not create
any permanent tenancy in her favour, the transaction
not- being. in- conformity. with section. 107. of. the
Transfer of Property Act. Considering the. long history
of Giribala and her successors’ possession for nearly
50 years, construction of structures of considerable
“duration, not objected to by the landlord, evidence of
transfers, alienation and succession from time to time,
recognition of transfers by landlord. by granting
dakhilas and absence of any attempt by the landlord to
take possession, the entry in the record:of rights as
‘Dakhalkar’ fades into insignificance. These are
matters which cannot be ignored in determining the
character of Giribala's possession. All these facts in
their totality have crowncd Giribala and her successors
with the status of permanent tenants. It is difficult
under the circumstances to limit Giribala and her
SUCCeSSOrs' POsscssion as being onc of tenants-at-will
or as one from year to year.

11. Ordinarily, the word "Dakhalkar’ in the
record of rights is no doubt indicative of a mere
tenant-at-will without any transferable or heritable
interest, but the word cannot be limited to a mere
tenant-at-will under all circumstances. Merely because
the word 'Dakhalkar' has been used Giribala’s fate
cannot be scaled. The subsequent history and attendant
circumstances as above are relevant facts to be taken
into consideration in determining the character of her
possession. In the case of Prodyut Sen Gupta Vs.
Nagendra Kumar Chowdhury, 52 CWN 72 it has
been rightly observed as follows : ,

"The word ‘dakhalkar' does not necessarily
_exclude a tenancy and the word may be used to
describe a tenant of a non-agricultural tenancy
who cannot be brought under any of the specific
categories mentioncd in section 4 of the Bengal
Tenancy Act, but who is a tenant neverthcless."

And further :

"In view of the finding of the Courts below
that the tenancy has become a non-agricultural
one, we are of opinion that it cannot be said that
the record does not recognise the tenancy, merely
because the word 'dakhalkar' has been used."

‘12. In the facts and circumstances of the case the
following observation of Maclean, CJ in the case of
A. Caspersz Vs. Kader Nath Sarbadhikari, ILR 28 Cal
"738 is apt:

"Although the origin of a tenancy may not
be known, yet it there is proved the fact of long
possession of the tenure by the tenants and their
ancestors, the fact of the landlord having
permitted them to build a pucca house upon it,
the fact of the house having been there for a very
considerable time, of it having been added to by
successive tenants, and of the tenure having from
time to time been transferred by succession and

            
            purchase, in which the landlord acquiesced or of
which he had knowledge, a Court is justified in
presuming that the tenure is of a permanent
nature”.

13. The Privy Council noted with approval the
decision in Caspersz's case in the case of
Afzal-un-Nissa Ys. Abdul Karim ILR 47 Cal 1 (PC).

14. In the case of Naba Kumari Debi Vs. Behari
Lal Sen, ILR 34 Cal 902 (PC) a tenure had been in
existence for about 80 years, the rent had never been
enhanced, it had again and again been sold by kabalas
purporting to convey an absolute interest, it had
passed by will and the new tenants had been recognised
by the landlords after such devolutions and it was held
under the circumstances by the Privy Council that the
defendant was not a mere tenant-at-will but the
inference was that the tenancy was a permanent tenure.

15. Hence the use of the word 'Dakhalkar' in the
CS record Ext. 11 is not conclusive. The subsequent
history of possession of the suit Jand and other
attendant circumstances admit of an inference that the
lcnancy was a permanent tenure and not a
tenant-at-will. Consequently the High Court Division
was justified in interfering with the finding, which is a
mixcd finding of fact and law, arrived at by the lower
Appellate Court.

The appeal is dismissed without any order as to
costs.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)

Shahabuddin         | Keramat Ali Bhuiyan being
Ahmed CJ, ATM 	  | dead his heirs, Shahida
Afzal J and Mustafa | Khanam & another...
Kamal J. 		  | ........ Defendant-Petitioners
			  | Vs.
Judgment 		  | Ramizuddin Ahmed Bhuiyan
August 8,1990. 	  | ...... Plaintiff-Respondent*

The Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Section 5 & Or. IX r. 9

It is wrong to say that for a remedial action
against an order time would start to run against one
from the date of the order and not from the time. when
one comes to know about it.

When an injury is caused to a party due to any
mistake or default committed by a court or its officers,
it is not only the right but also the duty of the court to
correct its own mistake.

‘The question of limitation is immaterial in a
case, when the court in restoring the suit merely
corrected the mistake of its own officers of not
informing the lawyers of the parties about return of
the record and the next date fixed.

Allahdino Vs. Fakir Mohammad & another 21 DLR
(SC) 382; Swire Mellor Vs. Swire, (1885) Ch.D. 239;
referred. we(4 & 5)

Shamsul Huq Chowdhury, Senior Advocate,
instrucled by Shamsul Hoque Siddique,
Advocate-on-Record —For the Petitioners.

Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, instructed by Serajur. Rahman,
Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent.

Judgment

ATM Afzal J : The respondent filed Title Sul
No. 238 of 1973 in the first Court of Subordinate

Judge, Dhaka for partition which was dismissed fo"

*Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal! No.
125 of 1987.

(From the Judgment and, Order dated a
August, 1990 passed by the High Court Divisio”
Dhaka in Civil Revision No. 622 of 1984).

            
            default on 3.1.1987. He filed an application under
Order 9 rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure for
restoration of the suit alleging that the record of the
suit was sent to the High Court Division in
connection with FA No. 226 of 1974 some time in
1976 and upon its receipt back, no notice was given
either to the respondent or to his learned advocate and
thus the respondent was prevented from appearing in
the Court when the suit was called on for hearing on
3.1.78. The petitioner opposed the prayer, inter alia,
on the ground of limitation.

2. The learned Subordinate Judge by order dated
18.7.84 allowed the Misc. Case No. 937 of 1981 and
restored the suit to its file and number subject to
payment of a compensatory cost of Tk. 300.00 by the
respondcnt to the petitioner. This order has been
upheld in revision by the High Court Division by the
impugned order dated 5 March, 1987.

3. Mr. Shamsul Huq Chowdhury, learned
Advocate for the defendant-petitioncrs, secking leave
to appeal from the aforesaid order of the High Court
Division, submitted that the learned Subordinate
Judge as also the High Court Division committed
substantial error. in not holding that the application
under Order 9 rule 9 CPC having been filed beyond 30
days of the impugned order of dismissal in
contravention of Article 163 of the Eamifation Act,
the same was barred by limitation.

4. There is little substance in this contention. It
is true that the suit was dismissed for default on 3.1,78
and ‘the application for restoration was filed: on
12.7.79. The respondent alleged and proved that he
came to know about the dismissal order for the first
timé on 10.7.79. The Icarned Subordinate Judge while
rejecting the objection as to limitation referred to and
relied upon the case of Allahdino Ys. Fakir
Mohammad & another 21 DLR (SC) 382 where it has
been held that where a litigant is kept in dark about the
fate of his'case, it is wrong to say that for a remedial
action against it'as provided by law, time would start
to run against him from the date of the order and not
from the date when he comes to know about it: "The
learned Judges’ of: the High Court Division quite
unnecessarily laboured from applying Article 181 of
the Limitation Act, firstly, because it was not held
that’ the view taken by the Subordinate Judge was
wrong and further’ that it was found by the learned
Judges themselves that the suit: was dismissed for
default because ‘the: Court's direction to inform the
learned advocate of the partics about the receiving
back of the record from the High Court Division was
not complied with and thus the Court had inherent
jurisdiction to restore the suit under section 151 CPC.
The Subordinate Judge himself noticed in his order
that the Icarned advocate for the respondent was not
informed as to SD in spite of the order of the Court
and thus he was not aware about the date of receipt of
the case record and the date of hearing of the suit.
When an injury is causcd to a party duc to any mistake
or default committed by a court or its officers there are
high authorities laying down that in circumstances of
this nature, it is not only the right but the duty of the
Court to correct its own mistake. In re: Swire Mellor
Vs. Swire, (1885) ChD 239 Down, LJ of the Court of
Appeal dealing with a question regarding the power of
a Court to correct its own mistake observed as follows

"I think, the true view is, as stated by the
Lord Justice Cotton, that every Court has
inherent power over its own records so long as
these records are within its power and that it can
sct right any mistake in them. It scems to me that
it could be perfectly shocking it the Court cannot
rectify the error which is really the error of its
own minister. An order as it seems to me even
when passed and entered may be amended by the
Court to carry out the intention and express the
meaning of the Court of the time when the order
was made, provided the amendment be made
-without injustice or on terms which preclude
injustice.”

5. Therefore, it will be seen that the auesten of
limitation was, in any view.of the matter, immaterial.
in the present case inasmuch as the Court in restoring
the suit merely corrected the mistake of its officers of
not informing the learned advocate of the parties about
the receiving back of the record and the:next date fixed.

The petition is dismissed.
Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT .
Appellate Division

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Kazi Mobarak Ali........
MH Rahman J,A T M 	 |....Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | Vs. 
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Mohammad Yeasin
Judgment 			 | Mazumder & others...:.
August 29,1990.  		 | .....Respondents*

Village Courts Ordinance (XLI of 1976)
Section 8(3)

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. VII r. II

There is no express provision in the Ordinance
barring the jurisdiction of a civil court to question the
legality. or propriety of the Village Court's
decision—Respondents in a- civil suit alleged ‘that they
did not nominate any representative but the Chairman
concerned out of grudge brought two of his men and
showed them being nominated by the respondents in
Village Court — Appellant (Defendant) proceeded for
rejection of the plaint in the face of these
allegations—Plaint in civil. suit, cannot be
rejected—To decide the truth of the matter evidence is
necessary which can be available only in course of
trial.of the suit which is prima facie maintainable.

Khondkar Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior
Advocate, Supreme Court (Mahbubey Alam,
Advocate, Supreme Court; with him), instructed by
Sajjadul ‘Huq, »Advocate-on- “Record—For the
Appellant.

Abu Sayed Ahmed, Advocate Sidshenetc Court,
instructed by Md, Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record
— For Respondents Nos. 1-13,

Dead substitution exempted vide order dated
4.3.87—Respondent No. 14.

Ex parte—Respondent Nos. 4-13 & 15.

———.
*Civil Appeal No. 58 of 1988,
- (From the judgment and order dated 3, 12,1984

passed by the High Court Division, Sele Bench, in
Civil Revision No, 12 of 1984).

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: In this appeal the
only question is whether a suit challenging the
unanimous decision of a Village Court, constituteg
under the Village Courts Ordinance, 1976, j,
maintainable on the ground of quoram non judice
when the said Ordinance has made a unanimous
decision final. Facts leading to this question are given
below.

2. The appellant had filed Case No. 12 of 1980
in the Village Court No. 6 of Jagannathpur Union
Parishad against the respondent claiming damage for
destruction of his Aush-crop. The Village Court was
apparently constituted with the required five members
including two representatives of cach of the two
partics and the Chairman. The respondents had,
however, contended that the case against them’ was a
mere counter-blast to a Criminal proceeding under
section 144 CrPC filed by them against the
complainant (Appcllant) in respect of the same land in -
which they claimed title and possession. The Village
Court, by an unanimous decision dated 16 May 1980,
allowed the complainant's case and awarded him
compensation of Tk. 100.00 from each of the
respondents, Since a unanimous decision or a decision
by majority of four to one, of the Village Court is
final and binding upon the parties the respondents
filed Title Suit No. 675 of 1980 in the 3rd Court of
Munsif, Comilla, for'a declaration that the decision of
the Village Court was void on the ground of malice on
the part of the Chairman. The defendant-appellant filed
an application under Order VII rule 11 Civil PC, for
rejection of the plaint taking the ground that the suit
was not maintainable as the impugned decision was
unanimous. The learned Munsif rejected the
application refusing to reject the plaint taking the
view that some sort of “appellate forum" was
necessary, particularly when the writ jurisdiction of
the High Court Division was under suspension at the
relevant time. This order of the Munsif was
challenged in revision (CR No. 12 of 1984, Comilla)
but the Icarned Single Judge of the High Court
Division, by his order dated 3.12.1984, refused 10
interfere observing, among. other things, that the
Village Court had “surreptitiously passsed the award
for damage", no matter their decision was unanimous:

3. Leave was granted by us to examine the —
question whether the plaint of the suit ought to have
been rejected in view of finality of the decision of the



            Village Court.

4. Kh. Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Iearned Counsel
for the appellant, has referred to the judgment of the
Trial Court namely, the Muttsif, particularly, his
observation that some kind of "appellate forum" must
be there to challenge the unanimous decision of the
Village Court. The learned Counsel has pointed out
that "appellate forum" has been provided in the
Ordinance but appeal is limited to cases where the
Village Court's decision is by majority of three to two
members. He has referred to section 8 of the Ordinance
which provides that if the decision of the Village
Court is unanimous or by majority of 4 to 1, then it is
final. The learned Counsel has argued that appcal is
the creation of statutes and when the statutcs did not
create any appcllate forum the Court cannot create it;
the view taken by the Trial Court is palpably
erroncous, the Icarned Counsel has further argucd.

5. Section 3 of the Ordinance has conferred
exclusive jurisdiction on the Village Court in all cases
relating to offences specificd in Part I, and in all civil
matters, specificd in Part II of the Schedule of the
Ordinance. There is no dispute that the offence alleged
against the respondents fell within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Village Court. And as the record
apparently shows, the impugned decisions of the
Village Court in unanimous and this decision is final.
But there is no express provision in the Ordinance
barring the jurisdiction of a Civil Court to question
the legality or propricty of any decision of the Village
Court. Sub-section (3) of section 8 provides that :

"Notwithstanding anything contained i in any
other law for the time being in force, any matter
decided by a Court in accordance with the
Provisions of this Ordinance shall not be tried in
any Court, including a Village Court.”

This indicates ouster of jurisdiction of any Court
in any matter which has already been decided by the
Village Court.

6. Mr. Abu Sayed Ahmed, learned Advocate for
the respondents, contends that even if the Civil
Court's jurisdiction is ousted by a law, still the Civil
Court has got jurisdiction to see whether the tribunal
concerned, such as the Village Court, was duly,and
properly constituted, that according to the provisions
of the statute, here, the Ordinance or whether the
tribunal followed the procedure ‘laid down. in. the
statute. Reliance is placed on a decision of this Court.” 
in Rafiqul Alam. Vs, Mostafa Kamal and others, 42
DLR AD 137, In ‘that case we had referred to an
observation of the Judicial Committee of the Privy
Council in the case of Secretary of State Vs. Mask and
Co., 44 CWN 709, and held that in spite of the
provision of the statute barring Civil Court's
jurisdiction in a case it still got power to see whether
the tribunal was constituted according to law or
whether it. had followed the provisions of law and
observed the fundamental judicial procedure or
whcether it acted bonafide.

7. In the instant case the respondents’ contention
is that the Village Court was not constituted with five
members according to the provisions of the Ordinance
which requires two members from cach party, besides
the Chairman of the Union Parishad. In their plaint of
the suit they alleged that they did not nominate any
representative ‘but it is the Chairman, who out of
previous enmity and grudge, brought two of his men
and showed that they had becn nominated by the
respondents whereas, they alleged, they did not
nominate any rcprescntative. Kh. Mahbubuddin
Ahmed had, however, produced before us a copy of the
Order-Sheet of the Village Court which shows that
the respondents had nominated two representatives.
But at this stage, it is the plaint of the suit which is
the only record before the Civil Court and it is on the
basis of that plaint that the.Civil Court is to see
whether the suit is barred by any law or whcther it is
not otherwise maintainable. The plaint shows that the
respondents did not nominate their representatives;
but the defendant-appellant pressed for rejection of the
plaint. In the face of the allegation in the plaint that
the. plaintiffs respondents, did .not nominate. their
representatives in the Village Court the plaint cannot
be rejected. To determine the truth of this allegation,
evidence i in necessary and this can be available only in
the course of trial of the suit which is prima facie
maintainable, The View taken by the Trial Court that
some kind of appellate forum must be provided for, 
is not correct; but we are upholding its decision on a
different ground, as stated above.

In the result, the appeal is dismissed without,
however, any cost.
Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | A Gafur alias Haji Abdul
MH Rahman J, Mustafa  | Gafur & others.....
Kamal J and Latifur   | .....Appellants
Rahman J.             | Vs.
Judgment              | Jogesh Chandra Roy and
August 27, 1990.      | another........ Respondents*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 342

Omission to examine the accused under this
section is not curable under sec. 537. “After. the
prosecution closes its evidence the Court. shall
examine the accused and ask them whether they: will
adduce any evidence in defence. Omission: to do.so
vitiates the conviction if such omission has prejudiced
the accused in their defence.

The conviction is set aside and it is directed that
the accused be examined u/s, 342 CrPC by the Trial
Court and thereupon the case be disposed of according
to law. : vaus(4)

KZ Alam, Advocate, Supreme Court, instructed
by Sharifuddin Chaklader; Advocate-on-Record— For
the Appellants.

Ex parte — Respondents.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed ‘CJ: In this appeal by
"special Icave the only question is whcther the
conviction of the appellants has been ‘vitiated by
non-examination of the accused under s. 342 CrPC or
whether this defect is curable by s. 537 CrPC, as held
by a learned Single Judge of the High Court Division,

2. Respondent No. 1, Jogesh Chandra Roy, filed
a complaint before the Magistrate at Dinajpur alleging
that the accused-appellants assaulted him and his men
causing gricvous injurics with daos when some cattle
of the appellants, which destroyed his Aush-crop, were
sought to be impounded. Cognizance was taken
_thereupon and in duc course, all the appellarits, 18 in

*Criminal Appeal No. 14 of 1986.

(From the judgment ands .der dated 12.8.1985
passed by the High Court Division, Rangpur Bench, in
Criminal Revision No. 151 of 1983 with Criminal
Revision No. 15 of 1984),

number, were put on trial before the Additiongy
District Magistrate in Case No. 843-C/80 to answer
various charges of rioting, hurt, wrongful
confinement, ctc. Their defence was that no
occurrence, as alleged, took place but they were falsely
implicated out of enmity. .

3. On consideration of evidence including
medical evidence the learned Additional District
Magistrate, by his order dated 11 May 1983, held all
the appellants guilty under s. 148 of the Penal Code
and sentenced them each to RI for six months, In
addition, two of the appellants namcly, Abdus Salam
and Ahmcd Hossain, were held guilty under s. 326 of
the Penal Code and sentenced to RI for 3 years and fine
of Tk. 5000/- cach. Furthermore, 5 of the appellants
were held guilty under s. 342 of the Penal Code and
sentenced to fine of Tk. 500/- cach. They preferred an
appcal—Criminal Appcal No. 46 of 1983—which
was heard and disposed of by the Sessions Judge,
Dinajpur, by an order dated 8 August 1983. The
learned Sessions Judge found that the framing of the
charges against the appellants was not proper and that
on conclusion of evidence Ied by the prosecution they
were not examined under s. 342 CrPC. On this
finding the learned Sessions Judge allowed the appeal,
sct aside the conviction and sentence and ordered for
re-trial from the stage of framing of the charge. The
appellants challenged this order of re-trial by filing
two revisional applications—Criminal Revision No.
151, of 1983 and Criminal Revision No. 15 of
1984—in the Rangpur Bench of the High Court
Division. The Iearned Single J udge, however, did not
find any defect in the framing of the charge; and as to
examination under s. 342 CrPC, the learned Judge
took the view that this is a mere irregularity which is
curable under s. 537 CrPC. On that view of law, the
learned Single Judge restored the order of conviction
but reduced the sentence. Leave was granted by us to
consider whether this decision was well founded in
law,

4. We have ‘heard Mr. KZ Alam, Iearned
Advocate for the appellants: He has contended that the
view taken by the learned Single Judge is not correct
and that omission on the part of the Trial Court to
examine the accused, on conclusion of evidence by the
Prosecution, under s. 342 is not curable by s. 537
since that omission vitiates the trial, Mr. KZ Alam,
however, agrees that for the omission to examine the
accused under ’s. 342, the whole case need not be


            
            re-opened so as as to start from the stage of framing of
charges. He submits that re-trial may start after the
stage Of examination of the accused. We find
substance in this submission. The view taken by the
Iearned Single Judge that omission to examine the
accused under s. 342 is curable under s. 537 is not
sustainable in law. After the prosecution closes its
evidence the court shall examine the accused and ask
them whether they will adduce any evidence in
defence. Omission to do so vitiates the conviction if
such omission has prejudiced the accused in their
defence.

5. In the result, conviction of the Appellants is 
set aside. The impugned order of the High Court
Division is also set aside. The order of the Appellate
Court is modified and it is directed that the accused be
examined under s. 342 CrPC by the Trial Court and
thereupon the case be disposed of according to law.

Ed.
SUPREME COURT

Appellate Division
(Criminal)

‘Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Nannu Gazi......

ATM Afzal J, Mustafa | ........... Appellant
Kamal J and Latifur |
Rahman J. |  VS:
Judgment | Awlad Hossain & others...
August 14, 1990. | .................... Respondents*

Cote of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 241A

- Magistrate cannot discharge accused persons on
the plea of alibi that they were at different places at the
time of commission of offences alleged by the

_ Prosecution—Magistrate's "finding" in this regard is
based on no evidence. Mere submission of some
Papers supporting alibi is neither sufficient nor
admissible as the stage of adducing defence evidence
was yet come Magistrate's order of discharge was not

sustainable as it was based on gross misconception of
law,

Rafiqur “Rahman, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, instructed by Serajur Rahman,

*Criminal Appeal No. 17 sr 1987.

(From the judgment and order dated 3.11.1985
Passed by the High Court Division, Barisal Bench; in
_ Criminal Revision No. 46 of 1985

Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellant.

M Nowab Ali,
Respondent Nos. 6, 8.

Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record —

Advocate-on-Record — For

For Respondent Nos. 1-5, 7,11 & 12.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record— For
Respondent No. 16.

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 9-10& 13-15.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: In this appeal by
special leave the simple question for determination is
whether a Magistrate can discharge the accused,
without framing any charge, under section 241A of
Criminal Procedure Code, merely on the plea of alibi
that they were at different places at the tic of
commission of the offence, alleged by the
prosecution.

2. Accused-respondents, 15 in number, were
charge-sheeted by the Police on the allegation that
they committed offence of rioting, criminal trespass,
theft and hurt, under sections 148, 447, 323, 379, etc.
of the Penal Code. The charge-sheet arose from a First
Information Report lodged earlier by the appellant-
informant, with Amtali Police Station on 13 March
1985. It was alleged therein that on the previous day at
about 5-00 PM accused No. 1 and his men (other
respondents), variously armed, attacked him and his
labourers when they were cutting earth from his land
comprising Plot No. 1850. This land is adjacent to
the homestead of accused No. 1. They assaulted the
appellant and his labourers; accused No. 1 dealt a
dagger blow to him and snatched away his cash and _
obtained his signature on a blank stamp paper
obviously for creating a false’ document of title over
the land. The hearing of the case was fixed for 17 June
1985 for framing charges. At this stage, two accused,
accused No. 1 and accused No. 7, produced some
papers apparently showing that, at the relevant time,
they were elsewhere. Papers produced by accused No.
1 showed that he was engaged in conducting two cases
in the Upazila Courts on the relevant day—12.3.1985
upto 5-00 PM. The paper of the other accused showed
that he was a Railway employee engaged in his duty at
Chittagong on the relevant day. On perusal of these
papers, the Magistrate came to a "finding" that as
these accused were far away from the scene of

            
            occurrence it was not possible for them to commit the
offence at the time and place alleged by the Informant.
On this finding the learned Magistrate discharged all
the accused observing that the allegation was
“groundless”. This order was unsuccessfully
challenged before the Sessions Judge and the High
Court Division in revision. Leave was granted to
consider whether the order of discharge was sustainable
in law.

3. Mr. Rafiqur Rahman, learned counsel for the
appellant, contends that the learned Magistrate totally
misconceived the provision of section 241A,
Criminal Procedure Code, and accepted the "plea of
alibi" without giving the prosecution any opportunity
whatever to challenge the plea of alibi which can be
considered only on evidence during trial. The learned
Counsel further contends that even if the plea of alibi
of two accused is accepted, there is no reason why the
remaining 13 accused persons would be discharged.

4. Section 241A CrPC empowers a Magistrate
to discharge the accused without framing any charge if
he considers the allegation to be groundless. The
reason recorded by the learned Magistrate for
discharging the accused-respondents is that two of the
accused persons were far away from the place of
occurrence at the relevant time, and as such it was not
possible for them to commit the offence. This was
taken as a "finding", and the learned Single Judge of
the High Court Division observed that when the
Magistrate came to a clear "finding" that the accused
were not present at the place of occurrence, there was
hardly anything to interfere with their discharge. But
we find that this "finding" of the Magistrate is based
on no evidence whatever, for evidence has not yet been
recorded in this case. Some papers were produced by
the accused in support of alibi but these papers are
inadmissible as no witness has been examined to
prove them, and it is simply because the stage for
adducing defence evidence has not yet come. The
defence may also prove the plea of alibi by
cross-examining the prosecution witnesses, but in
this case the prosecution has not yet been given any
chance to examine witnesses. Provision of section
241A is found to have been seriously misconceived by
the learned Magistrate. It may be mentioned here that
the provision in section 241A is not altogether new in
the Criminal Procedure Code. This has been brought
in by an amendment by Ordinance No. LX of 1982.
By this and other Ordinances, procedure for trial of
summons cases by Magistrates was made applicable
to trial of all cases by Magistrates abolishing the
distinction between erstwhile Summon cases an
Warrant cases. The procedure for warrant cases Was |
laid down in Chapter-XXI which has been deleted
completely by the said amendment. In the unamended
Chapter-XXI, section 253(2) provided for discharge of
an accused without framing any charge if the
Magistrate considered the allegation "groundless",
"Groundless” appearing in both the sections, 241A
and former section 253, means that the materials |
produced before the Magistrate against the accused are
either so frivolous, absurd or insufficient that no |
useful purpose would be served by framing a Charge |
against the accused. In the instant case the Police
Report (charge-sheet) shows that at the relevant time
and place, alleged by the prosecution, the accused
committed the offence. Two of the accused took the
plea of alibi but that plea shall have to be proved by
the accused after prosecution has lcd its evidence,
Moreover, mere submission of some papers in
support of alibi is not sufficient; the papers should be
produced in evidence by some witness who must face
cross-examination as to whether the papers are
genuine or fabricated. Obviously that stage has not
yet come. The order of discharge is therefore not
Sustainable in law as it is based on gross
misconception of the provision laid down in section
241A CrPC.

5. In the result the appeal is allowed. The
impugned order of discharge, which has been
confirmed in revision by the High Court Division, is
set aside and it is directed that the case (GR Case No.
1185 of the Court of Upazila Magistrate, Amtali)
proceed according to law. :

Ed.




            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

MH Rahman J, ATM Afzal J | The State.....Appellant
& Latifur Rahman J.	 | Vs.
				 | Mofazzal Hossain
Judgment 			 | Pramanik...............
June 27,1990. 		 | ...............Respondent*

Evidence Act (I of 1882)
Sections 17 & 23

Admission—its evidentiary value—A statement |

when sought to be used as an admission of its maker,
must be clear and definite leaving no doubt about its
content. A vague statement or one which is capable of
different interpretations, is not an admissian. Letter
written by one brother to another regarding transfer of
shares, which is not clear in its meaning and definite
in its intention cannot be accepted as an admission.
For a statement to be used as admission against the
person making it, it is not necessary that he must have
prior knowledge that it might be used against him.
The letter written from Calcutta and received at Dhaka
does not indicate that there was any agreement
between the two brothers that the statement therein
was not to be used as evidence in court in future. The
letter does not therefore attract the prohibition of
section 23.

. Thiru John Vs. Subramanyan, AIR.1977 SC 1724;

Ram Kumar Vs. Chouduri Nar Pat Singh, 34 1A.27; Nur
Mohd Mallik Vs. Sudhir K Biswas, 17 DLR 15 ref. ...(7-10)

B Hossain DAG instructed by AW Malik
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellant. _
Ex parte — For the aCoponient. To

Judgment

MH Rahman J: The respondent Mofazzal
Hossain Pramanik along with four others were tried
under sections 302/34 of the Penal Code for killing
his wife Halima Bibi. He was convicted by the Trial
Court under section 302 of the Penal Code and
sentenced to death by hanging. Four others were
acquitted of the charge of murder, but two of them,

- *Criminal Appeal No. 10 of 1987.

(From the.judgment and order dated 17th April,
1985 passed by the High Court Division, Rangpur
Bench, in- Death Reference No.3 of 1983 with
Criminal Appeal No. 66 of 1983).

AD~9

Ekabbar Ali Pramanik and Majibur Rahman
Pramanik, were convicted under section 201 of the
Penal Code. The High Court Division set aside the
order of conviction of the respondent after finding no
evidence against him.

2. The prosecution case, in brief, is that in the
night following 14th Sraban 1388 BS corresponding
30.7.81ahe respondent Mofazzal Hossain, at the
instigation: of his father, Ekabbar Ali, mother,
Momena Bibi and uncles, Majibur Rahman Pk., and
Mohammad, Ali Pk., brutally killed his wife Halima.
In that night ‘At about 10-00 PM the accused Ekabbar 
Ali went to Halima's parents’ house and informed
them. that their daughter was seriously ill. In the
following morming the accused Majibur Rahman Pk.,
went to Shibganj Police Station and informed the
police that Halima and her husband had a quarrel in the
afternoon of the 14th Sraban 1388 BS (corresponding
to 30.7.81) and that Halima committed suicide by
taking poison at 11.00 PM, An UD case was started
on that report. On the following morning Halima's
two uncles, PW 1, PW 2, brother, PW 5 and mother,
PW 6 went to the house of her husband and found
Halima lying dead on the floor of the dwelling hut of
her husband bearing marks of multiple injuries. PW 1
Sahiruddin went to the thana to lodge the FIR, but the
police officer refused to record the same on the plea
that the informant did not see anyone to kill Halima
and that an UD case had already been started. PW 12
the Sub-Inspector of Police came to the house of the
accused persons and held inquest on the dead body of
Hafima. On post-mortem examination of the dead
body PW 11, Dr. Md. Hafizur Rahman found
ecchymosis on various parts of the body, fracture of
the left parietal bones, blood clots under the injured
areas and inside the skull. According to him the death
was due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of the
aforesaid injuries which were ante-mortem and
homicidal in nature. On 15.9.81. PW 5 Mozaffar
Hossain Mondal, brother of the deceased, filed a
petition of complaint before the Court of
Subdivisional Magistrate; Bogra. Subsequently, on
the receipt of the post-mortem report the police called
the informant PW 1 and recorded the FIR on 16.10.81.

3. The defence case is that Halima Bibi
committed suicide by taking poison. Further case of
the respondent is that from two days before the
occurrence he was at his maternal grand-father's place
in the village Krishnapur and. was engaged in
transplantation of paddy there.

            
            4. The prosecution examined 15 witnesses
tendered 6 others. With regard to the evidence of PWs
1,2,5 and 6 the High Court Division observed :

“All that they have stated in evidence is that
they did not find the condemned prisoner Mofazzal
Hossain Pk. in his house at the time when they
visited his house or subsequently at the time of
inquest. The defence case that the condemned
prisoner went to the house of his mother's father
2 days before the occurrence to cultivate paddy has
been denied by those PWs, but there is no
evidence either that the condemned prisoner was
present in his house in the night of occurrence or
before that. Except for the fact that the condemned
prisoner was not found in his house, there is no
evidence connecting him with the murder of

’ Halima Khatun. there is no evidence that anyone
heard any sound of beating from the house of the
condemned prisoner in the night of occurrence or
that anyone saw the condemned prisoner leaving
the PO after the occurrence."

5. Leave was granted to consider whether the
attending circumstances in the case were incompatible
with the husband's innocence, though nobody saw
him killing his wife.

6. The learned Counsel for the State contends
that in the facts of the case the respondent must have
committed the murder by closing the door of his
dwelling hut, and that his parents and uncle, living in
the adjacent huts, were not likely to hear any sound of
beating or cries of the victim, and even if they had seen
or heard anything they would not have disclosed that
to any one else. From the accused Majibur Rahman's
report to the police, Ext.6, that as a sequel to the
quarrel between the husband and the wife the latter
committed suicide it is abundantly clear that the
respondent was in his house on 30.7.81. It is further
contended that as the death of Halima took place
inside her husband's hut, a fact especially within the
knowledge of her husband, the burden of proving
otherwise was on him, and when he failed to establish
his alibi the High Court Division ought to have drawn
an adverse inference against the accused under section
105 read with section 106 of the Evidence Act.

7. In his appeal before the High Court Division |
the respondent took a ground that the Sessions Judge
erred in law in finding that the husband was at home
on 30.7.81 and also in the night of occurrence on the 
basis of an inadmissible documentary evidence (Ext.

6), the co-accused Majibur Rahman's report to
police of the UD case, lodged after the alleged
commission of the offence. In acquitting the
respondent the High Court Division, however, did not
advert to that ground.

8. The learned Counsel for the State has
emphatically asserted that Ext. 6 is an admissible,
evidence and that the Trial Court rightly Considered
the statement made therein by the accused Majibur
Rahman before the investigation of the case. He has
further contended that this evidence along with other
circumstances, there being no explanation as to the
injuries found on the dead body of the deceased, as to
the absence of the deceased's husband at the inquest
the dead body and at the funeral, and in view of the
false story of the accused's father that Halima was |
seriously ill and equally false story of the accused's .
uncle that she committed suicide by taking poison and 
the accused's failure to prove his plea of alibi the Trial
Court rightly relied on Ext. 6.

9. The document Ext. 6, a report to the police of |
the commission of an cognizable offence, suicide, is 
no doubt admissible for proving: that such an
information was made to the police. It does not,
however, establish the truth of the report or of the
statements made thercin. In this case the prosecution
exhibited it to prove that the information was made
falsely. The respondent did not get any opportunity to
cross-examine the maker of the statement. PW 15 the
Police Officer who recorded Ext. 6 on the basis of the
verbal statement of the accused Majibur Rahman
merely proved the document and the signature of the
maker. Though the accused Majibur Rahman was
confronted with his statement made in Ext. 6 the
respondent was not confronted in examination under
section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, either
with Ext. 6 or with the evidence of PW 15, though his
attention was carefully drawn to the evidence of other 
material witnesses like PWs 1, 2, 5, 6 and 11.

10. The High Court Division's finding that the
case against the respondent is one of no evidence may
appear to be an over generalized statement, but basically
it is a correct finding, because the incriminating
circumstances for which the respondent could at all be
arraigned lost all its relevance for lack of legal evidence
for establishing the crucial fact that the accused was!
his house when his wife was killed there.


11. In criminal cases section 106 of the ae
Act is attracted in exceptional cases where a relevant


            
            fact is pre-eminently within the knowledge of the
accused. The rationale is simple. It is just and proper
that the accused is to prove a fact that is especially
within his knowledge because he could do so without
difficulty or inconvenience, and for the prosecution it
will be well-nigh impossible or highly inconvenient
to throw any light on such a matter. However, by
invoking the provision of section 105 or 106 of the
Evidence Act the prosecution cannot relieve itself of
its duty of discharging its general burden of proving its
case beyond reasonable doubt. It is true that the burden
of proving a plea of alibi or any other plea specifically
set up by an accused for absolving him from criminal

liability lies on him. But his burden is somewhat’

lighter than that of the prosecution. An accused could
be considered to have discharged his burden if he
succeeds in creating a reasonable belief in the existence
of circumstances that would absolve him from
criminal liability, but the prosecution is to discharge
its burden by establishing the guilt of. the accused
beyond all reasonable doubt. Again in another sense an
accused's burden is lighter, because the Court is to
consider his plea only after, and not before, the
prosecution leads evidence for sustaining a conviction
or for making out a prima facie case.

12. In this case how much the respondent could
explain the circumstances in which his wife died
depended on where he was at the material time. When
the prosecution failed to prove that the accused was in
his house where his wife was murdered he cannot be
saddled with any onus to prove his innocence. Had it
been established by evidence that the accused was in
his house at the material time, pointing a finger at
him as the probable assailant, then the Court could
have in deciding the matter considered his failure to
adduce explanation or the falsity of his explanation
along with other incriminating circumstances.

13. Very recently in a wife-killing case, the State
V. Khadem Mondal, Criminal Appeal No. 22 of
1985, where the wife died in the house of the husband
and the defence could not give any satisfactory
explanation as to how the deceased died, the husband
Was acquitted because none of the prosecution
Witnesses specifically stated that the husband was
Present either in the night of occurrence or in the early
morming when the witnesses came to his house. In
delivering the judgment for the Court brother Latifur
man, J. observed :

"The only fact that the girl was found lying

dead in the room of her husband, although very
grave and definitely incriminating, susceptible to
give rise to a genuine moral conviction as‘to the
guilt of the respondent, in the absence of some .
other incriminating conduct of the respondent, is
not sufficient to convict the respondent and as
such the High Court Division was correct in
holding that the case lacks in legal evidence
warranting a conviction under section 302 of the
Penal Code."

14. The learned Counsel for the State tried to
distinguish the case from the instant one by referring
to Ext.6, suggesting the presence of the husband in
the house where the wife was murdered. I have already
held that Ext. 6 cannot be used against the accused as
an evidence of his presence in his house at the
material time. .

15. As in our country the Courts do not follow
the inquisitorial method, the prosecution is to produce
legal evidence before the Court for bringing the
offender to book. The prosecution is not, however,
bound to examine all the witnesses mentioned in the
FIR or in the charge-sheet, particularly when a cited
witness is not likely to tell the truth, either because of:
being gained over by inducement, or pursuasion, or at
the intercession or the insistence of the friends of the
parties who want both the aggrieved and the accused to
forgive and forget, even though the offence alleged to
have been committed is not a compoundable offence.
In Stephen Seneviratne Vs. The King AIR 1936 PC
289 (300) their Lordship of the Privy Council
disapproved the idea" that a prosecution must call
witnesses irrespective of considerations of number and
of reliability, or that a prosecution ought to discharge
the functions both of prosecution and defence. If it does
so confusion is very apt to result, and never is it more
likely to result than if the prosecution calls witnesses
and then proceeds almost automatically to discredit
them by cross-examination." Their Lordships,
however, emphasised : "Witnesses essential to the
unfolding of the narrative on which the prosecution is
based, must, of course, be called by the prosecution,
whether in the result the effect of their testimony is for .
or against the case for the prosecution."

16. In this case the prosecution tendered five
witnesses. Some of them, PWs 3 and 4, were-close
neighbours of the accused. By filing a petition the
prosecution gave explanation that those witnesses
were gained over, but none of the prosecution

            
            witnesses who were examined deposed to that effect.
The manner of tendering witnesses by simply filing
an application and making a general statement that the
witnesses have been gained over, without adducing
any evidence to that effect, is of no assistance to the
Court, and it is disapproved. 

17. That Halima died of assault in the house of
the respondent is proved. No doubt, strongest
suspicion will be against the respondent that at his .,
hands Halima died. But to make him liable, the
minimum fact that must be brought on record, either
by direct or circumstantial evidence that he was in the
house at the relevant time or night. To fix the
rspondent only with the charge, it has to be borne in
mind that in the house, the parents and others were
there who were also made accused for murder, but they
have been acquitted.

18. The prosecution cast a wide net implicating
the respondent, his parents and uncles, but failed to
unfold its basic case. In spite of surrounding
incriminating circumstances, for lack of legal
evidence, particularly due to non-examination of
material witnesses like the neighbours, the crucial
question, whether the respondent was present in his
house when his wife died there remains unanswered.
The impugned order of acquittal is, therefore, upheld.
The appeal is dismissed.

ATM Afzal J: I have gone through the
judgments written by my learned brothers MH
Rahman and Latifur Rahman JJ. I agree with the
decision of brother MH Rahman J.

Latifur Rahman J: I had the privilege of
going through the judgment of my learned brother
MH Rahman, J. I respectfully differ with the view
taken by my learned brother. The reasons for
delivering this dissenting judgment are elaborately
delineated hereinbelow.

21. Respondent Mofazzal Hossain Pramanik
was convicted under section 302 of the Penal Code and
sentenced to death by the Sessions Judge, Bogra. On
appeal, the High Court Division acquitted respondent
Mofazzal Hossain Pramanik from the charge under
section 302 of the Penal Code':and upheld the “
conviction of the respondent's father co-accused
Ekabbar Ali Pramanik and uncle Majibur Rahman
under section 201 of the Penal Code but reduced their
sentences.

22. The prosecution case in short, is that,
deceased Halima Khatun was married with respondent
Mofazzal Hossain Pramanik on 30.7.80. Since then
they lived as husband and wife till her death. On the
night following 30.7.81 accused Mofazzal Hossain
along with his father, uncle and mother brutally
assaulted Halima Khatun with lathis in that night a
about 10 PM as a consequence of which she died soon
thereafter. Accused Ekabbar Ali, the father of the
respondent went to parents’ house of deceased Halima
Khatun and informed that Halima Khatun was
seriously ill and in the following morning accused
Majibur Rahman went to Shibganj Police Station and
lodged a UD Case being UD Case No.25 of 1981 on
1.8.81 to the effect that Halima had a quarrel with her
husband in the afternoon on 30.7.81 for which he
gave slaps and in the night Halima Khatun committed
suicide by taking poison. In the following morning,
informant PW 1 Shahiruddin Pramanik, complainant
PW 5 Mozaffar Hossain Mondal and other close
relations of deceased Halima went to the house of the
respondent and saw the dead body of Halima lying
within the dwelling hut of the respondent with
multiple injuries on her person. In pursuance of the
aforesaid UD Case, police came to the place of
occurrence, held inquest on the dead body and sent the
same to the morgue for post mortem examination.
The informant and the complainant also went to the
Police Station to lodge the First Information Report
but police did not record the FIR on the plea that UD
case had already been started. After a few days
complainant PW 5 Mozaffar Hossain Mondal filed a
petition of complaint, exhibit 2 on 15.9.81 in the
Court of Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Bogra.
Subsequently on reccipt of the post mortem report the
First Information Report was lodged by PW 1
Shahiruddin against all the accused persons 0?
26.10.81. After investigation police submitted charge
sheet only against respondent Mofazzal Hossain
Pramanik and submitted final report against all other
accused persons. Subsequently the learned
Sub-Divisional Magistrate sent both the cases for trial
before the Sessions Judge, Bogra. ;

23. The defence of respondent Mofazzal Hossain
Pramanik by way of suggestion to the prosecutt
witnesses and also in his examination under sect
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, is that
Halima Khatun committed suicide by taking poison
and that the respondent was engaged in transplantation
of paddy in the house of his ‘Nana’ Nasiruddin Pa
in village Krishnapur two days before the occurence


            
            and as such he was not at home on the night of 
occurrence. The case of other accused persons is that
Halima Khatun actually committed suicide by taking
‘endrine’ and all the accused persons have been falsely
implicated in this case.

24. State being aggrieved by the order of
acquittal of the respondent by the High Court
Division has filed this appeal for special leave. Leave
was granted to consider firstly, whether the learned
Judges of the High Court Division were correct in
observing that the present case was a case of no
evidence and secondly, whether the High Court
Division's order of acquittal was perverse as the strong
circumstantial evidences adduced by the prosecution
have been totally disregarded and ignored.

25. At the outset it is to be stated that in this
case there is no eye-witness of the murder and the case
against the respondent entirely depends on
circumstantial evidences. It is needless to say that the
Standard of proof required to convict a person on
circumstantial evidences is now well-settled by all
judicial pronouncements. It is to be seen whether the
approach of the High Court Division was correct in
holding that this is a case of no evidence in the face of
strong circumstantial evidences adduced by the
Prosecution. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division took the case to be one of no evidence
because prosecution could not lead any evidence that
the respondent was present in his house in the night of
Occurrence or before that, or that anybody saw the
respondent leaving the place of occurrence after the
Occurrence. Another fact, the High Court Division
thought was very material in holding that this is a case
Of no evidence as there was no evidence that anyone
heard any sound of beating from the house. These are
the three premises on which the High Court Division
held that this was a case of no evidence. In other
words no evidence could be led by the prosecution in
these three aspects as found by the Iearned Judges of
the High Court Division and consequently the Judges
thought it to be a case of no evidence. This approach
of the High Court Division was totally erroncous.
the learned Judges of the High Court Division ought
to have approached the case from this angle that the
prosecution has adduced evidence in the nature of
circumstantial evidences and whether these are
sufficient to convict the respondent. It is unfortunate
that the Judges instead of approaching the case
from this angle, thought it to be a case of no evidence
basing their reasonings on some negative facts which
was difficult in the facts of this case for the
prosecution to prove. Thus, I hold that this is not a
case of no evidence and the approach being erroneous,
the Iearned Judges failed to apply their judicial minds
to this aspect as to whether the circumstantial
evidences are conclusive in nature to warrant the
conviction under section 302 of the Penal Code. If in a
given case there is no direct and circumstantial
evidence against an accused person, then one can say
that it is a case of no evidence. In the present case
there is no direct evidence and evidences are
circumstantial in nature and as such the High Court
Division could have held that the circumstantial
evidences are not conclusive in nature to convict the
respondent. But for that, it could not be said to be a
case of no evidence. Thus, the first point on which
leave was granted has substantial merit. This error in
approach has ultimately affected the material
consideration on the merits of the case relating to
correct evaluation of the evidence on record.

26. The prosecution case, is that, the respondent
along with others committed murder of Halima
Khatun in the night of occurrence in the house of the
respondent. As against this, the case of respondent,
was that he was working in the paddy field of his
grandfather Nasiruddin Paiker at village Krishnapur
two days before the date of occurrence which would
make it impossible to believe that he could have
committed the murder of his wife. That Halima
Khatun was murdered in the house of her husband in
the night of occurrence was accepted by both the
Iearned Sessions Judge as well as by the Iearned
Judges of the High Court Division. The learned
Judges of the High Court Division observed in their
judgment as follows :

"From the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 5 and 6 and
from the corroborating medical evidence of PW
11 we are left with no doubt whatever that
Halima Khatun was brutally murdered."

27. In view of this above finding, the primary
question remained to be decided as to who murdered
Halima Khatun in the night of occurrence in the house
of her husband. In considering this, I am called upon
to consider the positive plea of ‘alibi’ of the
respondent. On questions of fact each case is to be
decided on the facts of that particular case as on facts
no two cases can be similar. Had it been the case of
the respondent that the wife committed suicide by

            
            taking poison, then, of course, the complexion of the
case would have been different. But herein the
respondent had taken two pleas in his defence. Firstly,
that she committed suicide in the night of occurrence
and secondly, that the respondent was not in his house
at the time of occurrence. The defence of the
respondent being two-fold on the face of it, the same
appears to be contradictory. If the respondent was not
there, the question of committing murder by him docs
not arise. On the face of this positive plea of ‘alibi’,
the defence should not have suggested to the
prosecution witnesses that Halima Khatun committed
suicide. This plea of alibi as taken as defence has not at
all been considered by the Iearned Judgés of the High
Court Division while acquitting the respondent and
thereby fell into an error in acquitting the respondent.
The respondent wanted the court to believe that he was
not in his house at the time of commission of the
offence and that at the relevant time he was working in
the paddy field of his grand father before two days of
the occurrence in a different village. This fact was
within the special knowledge of the respondent.
Sections 103 and 106 of the Evidence Act clearly
indicate that under the law an obligation was cast upon
the respondent to prove this assertion by adducing
evidence but unfortunately the respondent did not take
upon himself the burden of adducing any evidence
whatsoever to show even the probability that he was
away from his home at the time of occurrence and that
he could not have committed the murder. The learned
Sessions Judge has rightly considered this plea of alibi
as set up in the defence but in the four corners of the
judgment of the High Court Division, I do not find
any application of mind to this positive aspect as has
been found by the Trial Court. I must state here the
correct interpretation of law in respect to a prosecution
case and defence plea of ‘alibi' as has been laid down by
Gajendragadkar, Chief Justice in AIR 1966 SC 97
which runs as follows :

"It will be recalled that it was with a view to
emphasising the fundamental doctrine of
Criminal law that the onus to prove its case lies
on the prosecution, that Viscount Sankey in
Woolmington Vs. Director of Public
Prosecutions, 1935 AC 462, observed that" no
matter what the charge or where the trial, the
principle that the prosecution must prove the
guilt of the prisoner is part of the common law of
England and no attempt to whittle it down can be
entertained". This principle of common law is a

part of the criminal law in this country. That is
not to say that if an exception is pleaded by an
accused person, he is not required to justify his
plea; but the degree and character of proof which
the accused is expected to furnish in support of
his plea, cannot be equated with the degree and
character of proof expected from the prosecution
which is required to prove its case."

28. If the respondent would have Ied some
evidence in support of his plea of alibi, the burden
would have shifted to the prosecution which it has still
to discharge his initial and primary onus. As a matter of
fact, the original onus basically remains on the
prosecution. But in the present case the fact remains
that in support of the plea of alibi no evidence
whatsoever was Iced by the respondent. The learned
Judges of the High Court Division having not said a
word with regard to the.defence case, I am constrained to
hold that the learned Judges have totally failed to
consider the case of the respective parties in their proper
perspectives. In the case reported in 1970(3) Supreme
Court Cases-26 correct approach has been made as to
how the prosecution case vis-a-vis the defence plea of
alibi is to be considered; which runs as follows :

"In this case, as generally in most cases, the
prosecution evidence and the evidence of alibi is
not to be considered in compartments. The
evidence on one part will have impact on the
other and the court has to consider the entire
material on the record as constituting one
complete picture. This is precisely what the
courts below did. In view of the conclusions of
the courts below we have no hesitation in
disagreeing with the appellants’ contention and
we repel Ram Dahin Singh's plea of alibi."

29. In that reported decision, Ram Dahin Singh
was charged with murder. His plea was that on that
day of occurrence he appeared in a court of Magistrate.
as a witness at Varanashi which is about 43 miles
away from the place of occurrence. He adduced
evidence to that effect. All the Courts disbelieved th¢ ,
evidence of Ram Dahin Singh and held that he could
have committed the murder. Thus if evidence is
adduced in support of the plea, then the court can
decide the truth or otherwise of the same. But if a plea
is taken which is known to the respondent alone and
no evidence is led, then how the truth or falsity of 
the plea could be judged. This plea of alibi as taken by the
respondent has not only been stated in his own words

            

            in his statement under section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure before the trial Judge but this was
suggested to the prosccution witnesses which they all
denied. This was indeed taken by the respondent at the
early stage of the trial and unfortunately the burden of
proving this alibi undoubtedly lay on the respondent
and the respondent failed to take any attempt either to
call any witness, to show that he was present in the
house of his ‘Nana" in village Krishnapur. There is no
evidence on record as to the distance of village
Krishnapur from the house of the respondent and as
such it is also not possible to know whether by
committing the murder in the night the respondent
could easily go to the other village. If some evidence
would have been led then it could have been said,
whether that evidence is worth believing and that a
reasonable probability of the respondent's being
absent could be considered. In this case, the learned
Judges of the High Court Division totally failed to
apply their judicial minds to this aspect of the defence
case which was very relevant to consider in the facts
and circumstances of the case. This aspect having been
totally overlooked, the circumstances adduced by the
prosecution have not been given due consideration by
the leamed Judges of the High Court Division.

30. I may point out that Ramaswami, J. as His
Lordship then was enunciated the scope of section 106
of the Evidence Act and its due place in criminal trial
in a case reported in AIR 1960 Madras 218, wherein
His Lordship observed as:follows in paragraph 5:

"Section 106 obviously refers to cases where
the guilt of the accused is established on the
evidence produced by the prosecution unless
accused is able to prove some other facts
especially within his knowledge which would
render the evidence of the prosecution nugatory. If
in such a situation the accused gives an
explanation which may be reasonably true in the
proved circumstances, the accused gets the benefit
of reasonable doubt though he may not be able to»
prove beyond reasonable doubt the truth of the
explanation (RV Senama (1914) 84 LJ KB 396).

But if the accused in such a case does not give
any explanation at all or gives a false or
unacceptable explanation, this by itself is a
circumstance which may well turn the scale
against him.

In the language of Prof. Glanville Williams,
“All that the shifting of the evidential burden does
at the final stage of the case is to allow the jury
(court) to take into account the silence of the
accused or the absence of satisfactory explanation
appearing from his evidence ‘(Page 129)." In the
above reported decision His Lordship in
concluding portion has observed as follows :

"To sum up, the accused is always entitled to
hold his tongue; but if he is in a position to
explain the only alternative theory to his guilt,
the absence of such an explanation must be taken
into account as my learned brother has done in the
instant case. "(Paragraph 15)."

31. If this is thc analysis of law in that reported
decision, then it is dij ‘cult for me to understand how
the Icarned Judges of the High Court Division could
be totally unmindful of this definite defence plea of
alibi in the present case inasmuch as in the present
case no evidence hawieapen adduced in support of this
positive case. Thus the false and unacceptable defence
plea of alibi must be considered along with the
circumstantial evidences on record.

32. In the back ground of the present case, I am
 to consider the circumstances and to see whether the
circumstances are conclusive in nature to warrant the
conviction of the respondent. I have already indicated
above that the High Court Division found that
Halima Khatun was murdered in the house of her
husband in the manner as alleged by the prosecution.
The place and time of occurrence are also not disputed
by the defence. Thus, the time, place and manner of
occurrence with regard to injuries have been proved by
the prosecution. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division also accepted the time, place and manner of
occurrence as alleged by the prosecution. Hence, let
me catalogue the circumstances appearing in this case
against the respondent : :

(1) If the respondent was present in his house
in the night of occurrence then certainly he was to
explain as to how his wife died in his own house
in the night of occurrence. But if he is absent and
if his plea of alibi is accepted as reasonably true,
then of course, he is not to explain about the
death of his wife. In normal circumstance a duty
is cast upon the husband-respondent to show how
his wife Halima died in the night of occurrence as
the husband and wife are supposed to live in the
night of occurrence in their own house without
any contrary evidence by the defence. Further,
from the evidence on record it appears that all the

            
            prosecution witnesses found the deceased with
multiple injuries in the hut of the respondent.
Thus it remained unexplained as to how the
deceased got those multiple  injuries in
consequence of which she died in the house of her
husband. This non-explanation of the injuries not
only falsifies the defence case of suicide, but also
a tellingcircumstance against the respondent. As
a matier of fact, the High Court Division also
accepted the same to be a case of murder.

(2) When the defence case, is that, wife
committed suicide and that the respondent was
away from his home for two days prior to the date
of occurrence the husband naturally would have
been present either in the morning or at the time
of inquest or at the Janaza. So non-presence of the
husband at any point of time after the death, at the
inquest and at the funeral ceremony remained
unexplained in the face of the prosecution
evidence that PWs 1, 2, 5 and 6, the very close
relations of deceased Halima Khatun, did not see
the respondent in the morning, at the time of
inquest and thereafter. Is it the normal conduct of
a husband whose wife committed suicide in his
house during his absence ? There being no
evidence on record in support of the defence plea,
one does not also know the distance of village
Krishnapur from the village of the respondent, or
whether it was impossible to come from there by
receiving the information within the time of
inquest and thereafter. The conduct of the
respondent was not the normal conduct of a
husband whose wife committed suicide.

(3) The next material circumstance, is that,
the dead body was found in the room of the
respondent in a brutally murdered condition as
testified by the prosecution witnesses. With
regard to that, a plea of suicide by taking poison
was set up, which was totally disbelieved by the
learned Judges of the High Court Division.

(4) There is another very material fact which
has been noticed by the learned Sessions Judge but
the learned Judges of the High Court Division
were totally oblivious of that material fact.
Unnatural death case was lodged by uncle Majibur
Rahman on 1.8.81 in Shibganj Police Station and
the same was recorded by PW 15 Abdul Baten,
Officer-in-Charge of Shibganj Police Station.
This GD Entry has been proved by PW 15 as
exhibit 6. PW 15 deposed that he read Over the
statement of this UD case to the said Majibur
Rahman who admitted the same as Correctly
recorded and then put his signature on it.In
cross-examination this exhibit 6 was not at all
challenged. Co-accused Majibur Rahman Also
stated in 342 CrPC that he did not give the false
GD Entry and Halima Khatun died by taking
poison. This piece of evidence exhibit 6 was
considered by the Iearned Sessions Judge, From
exhibit 6 it appears that Majibur Rahman stated
therein that on 30.7.81 there was a quarrel
between the husband and wife in the afternoon on
30.7.81 and at that time his nephew Mofazzal
Hossain Pramanik gave slaps by being angry and
on that day his nephew's wife secretly took 
poison and committed suicide. The exhibit 6 was
considered by the Sessions Judge as a material
piece of evidence to show that accused Mofazza] |
Hossain was at home in the afternoon of the
occurrence. The respondent pleaded ‘alibi’ by
saying that he was away from his house two days
before the occurrence, but no witness having been
examined in support of this definite plea, the
learned Sessions Judge considered exhibit 6 as a
vital piece of documentary evidence of
circumstance that the respondent was present in
the house in the night of occurrence. Defence
having adduced no evidence in support of his plea
of alibi, this document exhibit 6 can be considered
as a very material document produced by the
prosecution. This unchallenged document also
goes to prove the falsity of the plea of alibi which
the respondent voluntarily took in his defence and
onus to adduce evidence was on the respondent.
Mr. B Hossain, learned Deputy Attorney-General
appearing for the State, submitted that Exhibit 6
is a piece of substantive primary documentary
evidence. He further submits that under section 35
of the Evidence Act the document itself is a
relevant fact and the learned Sessions Judge has
rightly relied on the same. Since, there is no
appearance from the side of the respondent, I am”
called upon to determine the exact nature of
exhibit 6 and the evidentiary value of the same as
a piece of documentary evidence. It cannot be
disputed that exhibit 6 is admissible in evidence
to proye itself as a relevant fact under section 35
of the Evidence Act as the same was recorded by
the Officer-in-Charge of the Police Station, a

            
            public servant in discharge of his official duties,
When this GD was lodged there was no allegation
against any one and in the contents itself also it
has been clearly said that Halima Khatun
committed suicide in consequence of a quarrel
with her husband. As a matter of fact, there was
no allegation against any person, Exhibit 6 only
contained the fact which led to the cause of
unnatural death of Halima Khatun. In a decision
reported in AIR 1972 SC 608 it has been held that
once a document is properly admitted in evidence,
under section 64 of the Evidence Act the contents
of the document are also admitted in evidence. In
paragraphs 18 and 19, their Lordships of the
Supreme Court of India have observed as
follows:

"Before leaving this case it is necessary to
refer to one of the contentions taken by Mr.
Ramamurthi, learned Counsel for the respondent.
He contended that the Police reports referred to
earlier are inadmissible in evidence as the Head
Constable who covered those meetings has not
been examined in the case. Those reports were
marked without any objection. Hence it is not
open to the respondent now to object to their
admissibility see Bhagat Ram Vs. Khetu Ram.
AIR 1929 PC 110.

It was next urged that even if the reports in
question are admissible we cannot look into the
contents of those documents. This contention is
again unacceptable. Once a document is properly
admitted, the contents of that document are also
admitted in evidence though those contents may
not be conclusive evidence."

A document is put into evidence to consider the
contents of the same. If the contents cannot be
Considered then what is the value and efficacy of
Putting the document in evidence. Thus, I can
lawfully consider the recitals and contents made in
exhibit 6. But if the documentary evidence is not
Substantive evidence then, of course, in law I cannot
Consider the contents of the same. Section 59 of the
Evidence Act says that all facts except the contents of
documents may be proved by oral evidence. The
documents will speak for itself as it is the best evidence
Of it's contents. Section 61 of the Evidence Act says
ant contents of the document may be proved either
case ae or secondar; y evidence and in the present
Ady it 6 is the primary evidence. The contents in
exhibit 6 is a substantive piece of evidence though it
is an information regarding a cognizable offence
leading to the cause of death of deceased Halima. It is
not the First Information Report in the present case.
A particular information whether amounts to an FIR
Or not is essentially a question of fact in a given case.
In this case this exhibit 6 GD Entry was lodged and
the Police Officer was under a legal obligation to
record the same. After receipt of the post mortem
report the same was found to be false as to the cause death of Halima and exhibit 3, the formal FIR in the
case was lodged. So this being not a FIR in the
present case, I do not see any reason for not treating
exhibit 6 as a piece of substantive documentary
evidence. The evidentiary value of the contents made
therein can be validly and legally considered by a court
as a piece of evidence. More particularly in this case as
a piece of very strong circumstantial evidence as to the
presence of the respondent in the night of occurrence,
Thus, this document is extremely relevant under
section 35 of the Evidence Act.

33. In view of the fact, that exhibit 6 was found
to be false so far it relates to the cause of death of
deceased Halima Khatun, a question may come up in
one's mind that, the other part relating to the quarrel in
the evening on the date of occurrence between the
respondent and the deceased could be necessarily false.
There is no rule of law that one part of a document
being subsequently found false, the other part will be
necessarily false. This document is to be considered as
any other piece of substantive evidence-either oral or
documentary. Doctrine of wholesale rejection will not
apply in the case of document. Thus, this piece of
evidence should be considered in the light of all
attending facts and circumstances of the present case. I
accept the statement as contained in this document as
it gets supports from the cogent circumstantial
evidences adduced in this case by the prosecution.
Hence, I believe this document to be a strong piece of
circumstantial evidence relating to the presence of
respondent in the afternoon of the occurrence and this
documentary evidence belies the defence positive plea
that the respondent was away from home two days
before the night of occurrence. The Sessions Judge
believed this piece of documentary evidence and
considered that to be true and found that Mofazzal
Hossain was at home in the night of occurrence. No
evidence having been adduced by the respondent, the
plea of alibi is not only falsified but the circumstance
of his being present in the house appears to be more

            
            probable, reasonable and natural in the facts of the
present case. If it is believed that he was present in the
night of occurrence then, of course, as husband he has
no other option but to explain as to how particularly
in his own hut the victim got those severe injuries as
testified by the witnesses and believed by the High
Court Division. Mere plea of alibi will not absolve
him from the liabilities unless he can lead some
evidence in support of his plea. Exhibit 6 having not
been challenged at all by the defence and having
admitted in 342 CrPC by the maker himself, the
recitals made therein deserved consideration and the
trial Judge has rightly considered it to be a very vital
and important circumstance in the case against the
respondent. Thus, Mr. B. Hossain was perfectly
correct to argue that exhibit 6 being a substantive
primary documentary evidence, it gives fullest
corroboration as to the fact that the respondent was at
home on 30.7.81. In the present case the wife having
died in the house of her husband the prosecution could
only lead evidence as to the cause of her death and to
the circumstances as mentioned therein above. The
prosecution could only prove the positive fact of his
being present in the house by adducing exhibit 6, and
no oral evidence could be led as the witnesses
mentioned in the petition of complaint, Ext. 2 are
men of the village of the respondent and they were all
gained over by the defence and to that effect the
prosecution filed a petition in the Sessions Court on
8.2.83. In the present case all the inmates of the house
who are very close relations of the respondent were
made accused and the villagers who were named as
prosecution witnesses being close neighbours of the
respondent also sided with the defence and they having
been gained over, they could not be adduced as
witnesses by the prosecution. I may point out that the
prosecution could only lead positive evidence to the
facts which are within its knowledge but the same rule
cannot apply to negative facts which were within the’
knowledge of the defence. The plea of the respondent-
as suggested could only be denied in the
cross-examination but the same could not be
anticipated by the prosecution. All possible defences
or circumstance which may exonerate the accused: was
not known to the prosecution. In the present case the
accused had the special knowledge as to the fact that was away from his house two days before the
occurrence. This was known to the respondent alone
'and. the respondent having not explained that by
adducing evidence as required under. the law, I must...
consider that the plea of alibi is a false and got up one
just to save himself from the criminal liability and,
on the contrary, I believe exhibit 6 and consider the
same to be a very strong piece of documentary
evidence showing the presence of the respondent in
the night of occurrence.

34. It is in evidence that in the night of
occurrence co-accused Ekabbor Ali, father of the
respondent, went to the house of the parents of
Halima Khatun and reported that Halima Khatun was seriously ill. Both the courts below found this to be a
false story and accordingly convicted the father under
section 201 of the Penal Code for giving false
information to screen the principal offender. Thus,
there is a probability that the father might have given
the false information about the illness of the deceased
to save his son, the respondent. There being no
contrary evidence on record by the defence as per the
theory of alibi, the giving of false information may be
considered to be another circumstance to save/screen
the respondent.

35. Another circumstance is of giving false GD
in the Police Station in the morning on 1.8.81. In the
early morning co-accused Majibur Rahman who is the
uncle of the respondent also recorded GD Entry
reporting about the unnatural death of Halima Bibi in
the Police Station which was recorded by
Sub-Inspector of Police PW 15 Abdul Baten and
marked as exhibit 6 in this case. After getting the post
mortem report it was found that UD Case was false.
‘Thus these two informations as indicated above were
found to be false by the learned Sessions Judge as well
as the learned Judges of the High Court Division.
These false informations throw light that father and
uncle knew the circumstances in which Halima
Khatoon died but they tried to screen the offender who
is the son and nephew of these two co-accused. Thesé
two false informations as circumstantial evidence
could have been left out on consideration, if there
would have been contrary evidence in support of the.
defence plea. The falsity of the story of illness and the
GD Entry are also two independent circumstances
which the learned Judges of the High Court Division
did not at all consider. Their conviction under section
201, of the Penal Code is also an indirect circumstance
against the respondent as they knew that they gave 
informations to screen their most dear one. The
conviction of co-accused Mujibur Rahman was

            
            particularly based on exhibit 6 which was found to be
false by the Iearned Judges of the High Court Division.
Thus exhibit 6 was used against the maker himself to
uphold his conviction by the High Court Division as
this accused did not challenge this document when he
was confronted under section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. It is to be remembered that
exhibit 6 was voluntarily made by Mujibur Rahman
when he was not an accused in the case, but he was
subsequently made a co-accused and the statement was
tendered in evidence as exhibit 6. Thus, this admission
is also substantive evidence by itself in view of
sections 17 and 21 of the Evidence Act.

36. In this case, prosecution had only led
evidence that deceased Halima Khatun was married
with the respondent on 30.7.80 and thereafter they
lived as husband and wife. The prosecution did not lead
any oral evidence to show that there was any quarrel
between the husband and wife regarding dowry. But
prosecution had proved exhibit 2, petition of
complaint filed before the Subdivisional Magistrate,
Bogra on 15.9.81 in respect of the death of the
deceased before filing of the formal FIR wherein PW
5, brother of deceased Halima Khatun, stated that at
the time of marriage dowry was given to the
respondent. In Ext. 2, a list of articles of dowry were
furnished. This exhibit 2, shows that Prince Cycle
No. 187476 was given to the respondent on 9.7.81
ie. 20 days before the date of occurrence. So this
exhibit 2, petition of complaint also gives a reference
of the articles of dowry amounting to Tk. 2,727.00
including the Prince Cycle. The prosecution has of
course not adduced any oral evidence that the
respondent was demanding further dowry and of ill
treatment, but exhibit 2 gives indirect indication of
that and this document may also be considered as an
indirect circumstance which might gave rise to the
quarrel. In filing this petition of complaint, Ext. 2
Stating the incident of murder, the reference of articles
of dowery is also very significant. It is true, that in
this case no oral evidence was adduced by the
Prosecution to show the causes which might lead to
the quarrel, But, it is needless to say that these days the
lawyers conducting the cases do not take so much care,
Pain and attention which is normally expected from
the members of the Bar and that may be the reason for
which the evidence to that effect might have been
Omitted. Be that as it may, since in exhibit 2 there is
Mention of articles given to the respondent at the time
of marriage and even 20 days before the date of
occurrence, I consider this exhibit to be a documentary
proof of some cause of quarrel which may Iead to the
murder of the deceased.

37. There is another material circumstance in
this case that the respondent did not adduce any
evidence in support of his plea of alibi. The
respondent could have easily produced any witness
from the house of his grand-father to show that prior
to 2 days of the occurrence he was working in the
paddy field at village Krishnapur. The omission on
the part of the respondent to adduce any evidence
which he could have easily produced raises the
presumption against him under illustration (g) to
section 114, Evidence Act, that, it would, if produced,
have been unfavourable to him.

38. Normally when a plea of alibi is taken by
the accused in a case, the accused either adduces oral or
documentary evidence in support of the plea of alibi.
Thus, when evidence is laid by both sides, the Trial
Court can consider the defence plea and the
prosecution case side by side. But in the present case a
definite plea having been taken and no evidence
having been led in support of that plea, I do not
understand how the court will believe that plea and
exonerate the accused. The primary onus has been
discharged by the prosecution by adducing strong
circumstantial evidences. The respondent having not
deliberately led any evidence in support of this false -
plea, it recoils against the respondent.

39. In the present case, it is very difficult to
understand why the respondent took the plea of alibi
and made no attempt to adduce any evidence with
regard to that. This circumstance of non-examining
any witness clearly goes to show the falsity in the
plea. Can the respondent be exonerated in the face of
all the circumstances mentioned above, for his mere
word of mouth, unsupported by any evidence that he
was away from his house in the night of occurrence?
The respondent's plea of alibi as set up would have
been a complete answer to the acquisition that he
committed the murder of his wife. There being no
evidence in support of this plea, it itself is an instance
of relevant conduct of the respondent which is a
confirmatory circumstial evidence against him. A
slightest evidence adduced by the respondent could
have shown the falsity of the prosecution case. .

40. In the present case in the examination of the
respondent under section 342 of the Code, the material
evidences of the prosecution witnesses and the medical

            
            officer were put in to show that the victim sustained
several injuries on face, head and other parts of the
body and for which it was suspected that the deceased
was done to death by the respondent. In reply, the
respondent said that he was away from home 2 days
before the date of occurrence and he was innocent.
Thus substantially the material evidences were put
under section 342 of the Code to explain the material
circumstances appearing in evidence against him.
Exhibit 6 is only a piece of circumstantial evidence
along with other circumstances adduced in this case. I
do not know that there is any law which says that each
and every piece of circumstances should be put in to
the accused. As a matter of fact no material prejudice
has been caused for not putting this piece of
circumstantial evidence to the accused. I think it was
not at all necessary to confront the respondent with
Ext. 6 as this document does, not at all implicate him
with the murder, but only speaks of his presence as a
circumstance. Whether a court will consider this
circumstance as conclusive or believe the same in the
facts of this, is purely a matter of inference and this is
never to be put in to the accused under examination
under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

41. An unreported judgment in Criminal Appeal
No.22 of 1985, wherein the husband was acquitted for
murdering his wife by the High Court Division has
been placed before us by the learned Additional
Attorney-General. In that decision, the acquittal order
was upheld by this Division and I myself is that other
Judge of that decision. In that case, the defence of the
accused was that he had been falsely implicated in that
case along with his father and others. In that case there
was no eye-witness and the only circumstance found
in that case against the husband was that death
occurred in the night of occurrence in the house of that
accused and in the early morning the respondent of that
case Khadam Mondal was not found at home.

42. In that unreported decision, PW 1 and PW 2,
the father and brother respectively of the deceased
testified, that not only the husband used to beat the
deceased but also the father-in-law of the deceased used
to beat her. In view of this evidence, we did not
consider it safe to uphold the conviction of Khadem
Mondal. It will be worthwhile to quote the observation
from that unreported judgment delivered by me.

"It is in evidence that the father of the
respondent (since acquitted) also used to assault the
deceased and it is in his house that the respondent.
and his wife had been living. Prosecution chose to
make not only the respondent an accused but his
father, uncles and others were also made Accused
who have, however, been acquitted by the Trial
Court. There can be little doubt that the girl died at
the hands of some inmate or inmates of the house
of Moyez Mondal but in view of the vague nature
of the evidence brought on record by the
prosecution (very likely duc to inexperience)
against a number of persons, it becomes Plainly
unsafe to fix up the respondent alone."

Hence, the unreported decision is Wholly
distinguishable from the fact of this case. In the
present case, positive plea of alibi was taken and no
evidence was Iced by the defence and on the contrary
exhibit 6 goes to show that the respondent was
present in the evening and there was a quarrel with the
husband and wife and the death occurred in the same
night. The contents as contained in exhibit 6 are
contrary to the defence plea of alibi and this admission
stood unrebutted. We may refer to the case of Khadem
Mondal only by way of an illustration and not by way
of an appeal to precedent, because on fact the two
cases are different. Each case has its own peculiar facts
and it is therefore always risky to appeal to precedents
On questions of fact. Thus, the unreported case is
distinguishable from the present case.

43. Before parting with the case, I must observe
that when a wife is killed in the house of her husband
at dead of night, at times it becomes very difficult for
the prosecution to lead direct evidence and in most
cases the prosecution has to rely on circumstantial
evidences. As in most cases, the inmates of the house
of the husband might be made co-accused or reluctant
to support the prosecution case to save their dear ones.
In a case of this nature, where a plea of alibi had been
taken and no evidence had been adduced in support of
that plea, I find it really difficult to acquit the
respondent when the prosecution has proved the case
against the respondent by cogent and reliable
circumstantial evidences, Consequently, I find the
respondent guilty of the offence under section 302 of
the Penal Code. But considering the fact that the
acquittal order was passed by the High Court Division
in the year 1985, I impose a sentence of
imprisonment for life against the respondent.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.
ORDER OF THE COURT.
"By majority decision the appeal is dismissed.
Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,   | Abul Kashem and
H Rahman J, ATM Afzal J | others......Appellants
and Mustafa Kamal J.    | Vs.
Judgment                | The State..........
August 1,1990.          | ........Respondent*

The Code of Criminal Procedure (Act V

of 1898)
Sections 9(3),29C, 31(4),409

An Assistant Sessions Judge deemed to be
appointed as Additional Sessions Judge has the
limited power of passing higher sentences except a
Death Sentence in those sessions cases which are
now triable by him by deeming and treating him to
be an Additional Sessions Judge, consequent upon
the changes brought. He shall not be deemed to be
an Additional Sessions Judge for all the purposes
under the Code, e.g. for ‘hearing appeals, revisions,
reference and reviews if they are made over or
transferred to him by the Session Judge. Under Sec.
409 the Sessions Judge can transfer the hearing of an
appeal only to an Additional Sessions Judge and not
to an Assistant Session Judge deemed to have been
appointed as an Additional Sessions Judge. The
dismissal in the instant appeal by the Asstt. Session
Judge and refusal of interference by the High Court
Division in revision are therefore illgal. The appeal
against conviction is therefore allowed and it is
directed that the Sessions Judge may himself dispose
of the appeal or transfer it to an Additional Sessions
Judge for disposal. (10)



Khandakar Mahbub Hossain, Sr. Advocate,
istructed by Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, Advocate-
on-Record—For the Appellants.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by AW Mallik, Advocate-on-Record—For the
Respondent, ; re :

*Criminal Appeal No. 22 of 1989. .
ieee the judgment and order dated 25th May,
anche by the High Court Division, Barisal
Barisal in Criminal Revision No. 23 of 1989)..°

Judgment

MH Rahman J: In GR Case No. 196 of
1979 of the Court of the Additional District
Magistrate, Bhola, Appellant No. 1 was convicted
under sections 326/379 of the Penal Code and
sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 1-1 /2
years and also to pay a fine of Tk. 500/- in default to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for onc month more.
Appellant Nos. 2 and 3 were convicted under section
323 of the Penal Code and each of them sentenced to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for 3 months.
Appellant No. 4 was convicted under section 379 of
the Penal Code and sentenced to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for 3 months and also to pay a fine of
Tk. 500/- in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment
for 1 month more.

2. The appellants preferred an appeal, being
Criminal Appeal No. 49 (3) 85, to the Court of
Sessions Judge, Bhola. The appeal was transferred to
the Court of Assistant Sessions Judge, Bhola, who
dismissed the appeal and affirmed the conviction and
sentence of the Trial Court. The High Court
Division summarily rejected the appellants’
revisional application by the impugned order dated
22nd November, 1989. Leave was granted to
consider whether the Assistant Sessions Judge was
invested with the power of hearing the appeal
against the order of conviction recorded by a
Magistrate, First Class.

3. The Learned Counsel for the appellants
relied on a Full Bench decision of the High Court
Division (Comilla) in Nurul Huda Vs. Bahar Uddin
& ors, 41 DLR 395 in support of his contention that
the learned Sessions Judge wrongly transferred the
appeal to the Court of Assistant Sessions Judge who
had not been invested with the power to hear any
appeal in the instant case. In the reported decision it
was held that under section 409 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure the Sessions Judge can transfer
the hearing of an appeal only to an Additional
Sessions Judge and not to an Assistant Sessions
 Judge who is deemed to be appointed as an Additional
Sessions Judge for some limited purposes.
4.  The following reference was made to the
full Bench:

"Where an Assistant Sessions Judge deemed
to be appointed as an Additional Sessions Judge
. under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 9

            
            of the Code of Criminal Procedure has the
limited power to pass higher sentences except
the sentence of death in those Sessions cases
which were not hitherto triable by an Assistant
Sessions Judge, but which are now triable by
him as well, deeming or treating him to be an
Additional Sessions Judge, consequent upon the -
change brought in section 290.of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and the introduction of
section 31 (4) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure or whether he shall be deemed to be
an Additional Sessions Judge for all purposes
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, namely,
for hearing appeals, revisions, references and
reviews if they are made over or transferred to
him by the Sessions Judge."

5. The Full Bench answered the reference in
following terms:

"An Assistant Sessions Judge under the
proviso to sub-section (3) of section 9 CrPC
has the limited power to pass higher sentences
except the sentence of death in those Sessions
cases which were not hitherto triable by an
Assistant Sessions Judge but which are now
triable by him by deeming and treating him to
be an Additional Sessions Judge, consequent
upon the change brought in section 290.CrPC
and the introduction of section 31 (4) CrPC. He
shall not be deemed to be an Additional
Sessions Judge for all purposes under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, namely, for hearing
appeals, revisions, references and reviews if they
are made over or transferred to him by the
Sessions Judge.”

6. It was also held that "under section 409 the
Sessions Judge can transfer the hearing of an appeal
only to an Additional Sessions Judge and not to an
Assistant Sessions Judge deemed to have been
appointed as an Additional Sessions Judge.”

7. Mr. B Hossain, the learned Deputy Attorney
General, appearing for the State, has not advanced
any ground against the Full Bench decision. He has
rather submitted that in view of the aforesaid Full
Bench decision the impugned judgment and order
dated 25.5.89 of the High Court Division and that of
the learned Assistant Sessions Judge be set aside.

8. The decision of the Full Bench is approved.
We set aside the judgement and order dated 25.5.89
of the High Court Division, Barisal Bench and that
of the Assistant Sessions Judge dated 29.1.89.

9. The appellants’ appeal in Criminal Appeal
No. 49 (3) of 1985 is remanded to the Cour of
Sessions Judge, Bhola for disposal in accordance
with law.

10. The Sessions Judge may himself dispose
of the appeal or transfer it to the Court of an
Additional Sessions Judge for its disposal. The
appeal is allowed. The appellants shall appear before
the Sessions Judge, Bhola and till then the bail
granted by this Court will continue.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate -Division

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,     | Attor Mia and another...
MH Rahman J, ATM          | ....Appellants
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J, | Vs.
and Latifur Rahman J.     | Mst. Mahmuda Khatun
Judgment                  | Chowdhury and others..
July 22,1990.             | ......Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908}
Sections 107 & 115

Remand—High Court Division, as a revisional’
court, was not justified to send the suit back on
remand to the trial court for fresh decision on the
evidence on record, without any direction to take —
additional evidence, when the court itself was
competent to decide the issue involved as the
evidence on record was complete. When the High
Court Division cannot make up its mind on the
evidence already on record it should not pass an order
of remand but should make up its own mind and
come to a decision of its own. The appeal is
remanded to the High Court Division for decision in
accordance with law. —....... (9 to 13, 15 & 17)

Dr. Rezia Khatun Vs. Bhanu Guha & another 1986
BLD (AD) 135; Abdul Awal Khan Vs. Md. Sadu Mia &
ors, 1986 BLD (AD) 156. Proboth Ranjan Shome Vs
Md. Easin, 1980 BSCR 457 ref.

*Civil Appeal No. 18 of 1988.

(From the Judgment and Order dated 14,5.87
passed by the High Court Division Sylhet Session in
Civil Revision No. 66 of 1986).

            
            MH Khandker, Senior Advocate (AJ Mohammad
Ali, Advocate with him) instructed by Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

SR Pal, Senior Advocate, (BK Das, Advocate
with him) instructed by Shamsul Haque Siddique,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondent No. 1.

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 2-8.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: The question raised in
this appeal by special leave by the
plaintiff-appellants is whether the High Court
Division was justified as a revisional Court to send
the suit back on remand to the Trial Court for a fresh
decision on the evidence on record and without any
direction to take additional evidence when the
revisional Court was itself competent to determine
the issues involved as the evidence on record was
complete. )

2. The appellants filed Title Suit No. 367 of
1981 in the 2nd Court of Subordinate Judge, Sylhet
under Muslim Law for directing transfer of the suit
land to the plaintiffs and ordering delivery of
possession of the suit land to them on their
depositing in Court the sale price of Tk. 40,000.00.
Respondent Nos. 2-9, owners of the suit land, sold
the same on a consideration of Tk. 40,000.00 to
respondent No. 1 by a kabala registered on 13.7.81.
The appellants and one Arabullah, owners of
Contiguous plot Nos. 5528 and 5526, claimed that
the appellants are entitled to pre-empt the suit land
under Muslim Law. On coming to know about the
Sale on 15.9.81 appellant No. 1 at once performed
the formalities of Talab-i-Nowasibat and
Talab-i-Ishad in presence of witnesses. Respondent
No. 1 having refused to transfer the suit land to the
appellants, the appellants to the exclusion of -
Arabullah, who did not perform the formalities,
instituted the suit.

3. The contesting respondent No.1 denied that
the Appellants. or Arabullah were owners. of
contiguous land and that appellant No.1 performed
the formalities, It is their case that the suit premises
consists not only of land but also of two pucca
latrine with CI sheet roof. Respondent Nos. 2-7 not
only sold the suit land to respondent No. 1 for Tk.
40,000.00 on 13.7.81 but also the structures
standing on the suit land for another sum of
Tk.40,000.00 on the same day by a different kabala.
Respondent No. 3 could not join in the transfer on
13.7.81 but he subsequently joined in the execution
of the two kabalas on 8.2.82. It is her further case
that the appellants have filed the suit as a
counter-blast to Title Suit No. 405 of 1980 and
Miscellaneous Case No. 197 of 1981 filed by the
respondents for declaration of their right of pathway
in the schedule land against appellant No.1 and for
mandatory injunction directing him to remove the
bamboo fencing and other obstructions put on the
pathway and also for permanent injunction.

4. The learned Subordinate Judge decreed the
suit by his judgment and decree dated 16.11.85 and
directed respondent No. 1 to transfer the suit land to
the appellants and to deliver possession of the same
to them on their depositing in Court the sale price
of Tk. 40,000.00 to her credit on the finding that the
appellants are the owners of the stated contiguous
plots, that the formalities of Talab-i-Mowasibat and
Talab-i-Ishad were duty performed, that the suit was
not barred by limitation and that there were no pucca
structures in the suit land.

5. Respondent No.1 preferred Title ApplesNe.
274 of 1985 and the appellants filed cross-objectioth
No. 13 of 1986 against the order directing
respondent No.1 to transfer the suit land as the said
direction was unnecessary. The learned District
Judge, Sylhet by his judgment and decree dated
20.3.86 affirmed the decision of the Trial Court of
all the points, dismissed the appeal and the cross
objection. The learned District Judge held that this
was not a case of partial pre emption. DW 1, son of
respondent No. 1. merely stated in his evidence that
by another kabala respondent ‘Nos. 2-9 sold a house
to respondent No. 1 but he does not say that any
pucca building. was sold. Ext. A and Ext. A (0),
certified copies of the two simultaneous sales, do
not mention any structures. The kabala for sale of
structures was executed probably to defeat future
pre-emption and with some cunning motive. The
appellants could not be forced to pre-empt the
structures of the other kabala as it was a different
transaction and as the kabala was not bona fide.

6. Respondent No. 1 preferred Civil Revision
No. 66 of 1986 and a Learned Single Judge of the -

            
            High Court Division, Sylhet Session by his
judgment and other dated 14.5,.87 remanded the suit
to the Trial Court for a fresh decision on the
evidence on record according to law and in the light
of observations made in the judgment.

7. Leave was granted from this judgment to
consider the question as to whether the High Court
Division fell into an error of law by passing an order
of remand when evidence was there already on record
sufficient to determine the question as to the
existence of pucca structures. It falls for
consideration in this appeal whether the practice of
ordering remand on the ground that the Court cannot
make up its mind on the evidence already on record
can be approved or not.

8. It appears from the judgment of the High
Court Division that the suit was sent back on
remand to the Trial Court on several points. First,
none of the Courts below considered the question as
to whether PW 1, the appellant No. 1 himself,
without knowing as to what are the formalities of
Talab-i-Mowasibat and Talab-i-Ishad could at all
perform the same and as to whether PWs 2 and 4,
obliging witnesses for the appellants, are
trustworthy, truthful, non-partisan and impartial.
Secondly, the Trial Court has not assessed the
evidence of PWs in the light of the allegation that
PW 2 did not inform PW 1 about the sale. Thirdly,
the Courts below did not consider whether there was
full performance of formalities in that there is no
finding that appellant No.1 expressed his readiness to
pay the consideration written on the document of
transaction. Fourthly, the Courts below did not
consider whether respondent No. 3 sold his interest
subsequently on getting consideration or along with
respondent Nos. 2 and 4-9. Fifthly, there is also no
finding whether appellant No. 2 performed the
formalities of the talabs and as to whether the decree
can be passed in his favour as well. Lastly, two
documents were executed on the same day, one for
the land and another for the structures for similar
price, but as the plaintiffs did not seek pre-emption
of the pucca structures on the land by performing the
formalities of the talabs, the Courts below ought to
have examined the question of partial pre-emption by
closely reading the evidence of structures in the suit
land. The High Court Division opined that the
Learned District Judge misread the evidence and
misappreciated the same, because in Ext. A it is
clearly stated that there are on the suit land two CI
sheet houses with pucca plinth, a pucca bathroom
and a pucca latrine. The High Court Division found
that PW 2 admitted the existence of pucca structurs
on the suit land. Hence the suit was sent back on
remand to the Trial Court for a fresh decision on all
the above six points according to law and in the
light of observations made in the judgment,

9. To start with the last point on Which the
order of remand was made, we fail to see how, the
order of remand was justified in the Circumstances
We do not express any opinion as to whether the
Iearned District Judge misread the evidence on record
as to the existence of pucca structures on the Suit
land. If he did, the revisional Court was fully
competent to set aside the judgment of the first
Appellate Court on the ground of misreading of 
important evidence on record and also could have
decided the point of law as to whether the appellants
were required under the law also to pre-empt the
second transaction of sale structures after performing
separate formalities of Talab with regard to the
same. When there was evidence on record and when
an appellate judgment is assailed in the revisional
Court on the specific ground of misreading of
important evidence on record, the revisional Court is
fully clothed with necessary powers to notice the
alleged misreading and set aside the judgment of the first Appellate Court, if necessary.

10. It is the contention of respondent No. 1
that there are pucca structures on the said land and
that the said structures were separately sold to her by
a contemporaneous but separate transaction. It is her
contention that the appellants should have 
pre-empted the structures as well after observing the
necessary formalities. As they have failed to do so
the suit will fail being hit by the rule of partial”
pre-emption. The appellants contended, on the other
hand, that the suit land does not contain any pucca
structures and the second transaction was not bona
fide and was only designed to prevent pre-emption.
The Trial Court found that there are no pucca
structures on the suit land and that the kutcha
structures can be removed at any time. The first
Appellate Court held that the respondent has failed
to prove that there are pucca structures in the suit
land and also held that the second transaction on
structures was not bona fide and was entered into
with a cunning motive. In the face of this concurrent



            finding the revisional Court was quite competent to
come to a decision of its Own on the basis of the
evidence on record if it found that there was gross
misreading of important evidence on record, but not
on the ground that there was mis-appreciation of the
evidence. Consequently the order of remand on this
int was uncalled for. The High Court Division did
not give any direction to take additional evidence.
That makes the order of remand doubly
objectionable.

11. With regard to the other points on which
the suit has been sent back on remand to the Trial
Court we find that the High Court Division clearly
transgressed its jurisdiction in directing the Trial
Court to consider the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 4
afresh after assessing their credibility,
trustworthiness, impartiality, etc. This amounts to a
direction to assess the evidence afresh. Credibility,
trustworthiness, etc, of witnesses are matters
pertaining to the domain of appreciation of evidence,
a special preserve of the Trial Court and the first
Appellate Court and once the option has been
exercised by the Courts below by accepting the
evidence of certain witnesses apparently upon
satisfaction of their credibility, etc, the revisional
Court cannot direct re-hearing of the same evidence
upon re-opening of the issue of their credibility, etc:
This amounts to a rejection of the appreciation of
evidence by the Trial Court and the first Appellate
Court, which a revisional Court is not competent to
do. ‘

12. With regard to the other four specific
points directing remand, the High Court Division
ought to have considered whether issucs of fact
contained therein were specifically raised in the Trial
Court and in the first Appellate Court and whether
those were being agitated for the first time in the
revisional Court. If not so raised, the revisional
Court was not obliged to entertain issues of fact for
the first time in revision. As for issues of law and
Mixed question of fact and law the revisional Court
itself was competent on the basis of the evidence on
record to come to a decision of its own without
Sending the suit back on remand to the Trial Court. —

13. Unnecessary and totally inexplicable order
Of remand entails hardship, agony of a fresh hearing,
delay, additional expenditure and the possibility of a
Second round revisional visit to the High Court Division.


14. This Court in the case of Dr. Rezia
Khatun Vs. Bhanu Guha and another, 1986 BLD
(AD) 135 deprecated the practice of sending the suit
back as remand to a revisional Court setting aside .
the concurrent judgments of the Trial Court and the
Appellate Court below decreeing the suit, when no
liberty was given to the parties to adduce fresh
evidence. It was observed:

"The long time of judicial decisions is to
the effect that the remand order should be
avoided as far as possible and even the Privy
Council in some cases observed that
indiscriminate order of remand tantamounts to
shirking the responsibility".

15. Further in the case of Abdul Awal Khan
Vs. Ms. Sadu Miah and others, 1986 BLD (AD)
156, this Court held that when evidence has been led
by both the parties and the two Courts below arrived
at conflicting findings, the High Court Division as
the revisional Court has to see whether the Trial
Court's finding had been reversed on proper
consideration of evidence. When evidence on all
material points are there on record, the revisional
Court is not justified in sending the case back to the
Court below for reconsidering the matter.

16. In Proboth Ranjan Shome Ys. Md. Easin,
1980 BSCR 457 this Court observed that it is
well-settled that remand orders are not to be made as
a matter of course. When there is sufficient evidence
on record, remand of a case to the Trial Court for
fresh hearing is not called for.

17. Our answer to the question at issue is
therefore in the negative and we accordingly hold
that the High Court Division was not justified as a
revisional Court to send the suit back on remand to
the Trial Court for a fresh decision on the evidence
on record and without any direction to take additional
evidence. When the High Court) Division cannot
make up its mind on the evidence already on record
it should not’ pass on order of remand but should
make up its own mind and come to a decision of its
own. ae

Hence the appeal is allowed and remanded to the
High Court Division for disposal in accordance with
law. No costs.

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Shambhu Nath Poddar...
MH Rahman J, ATM         |....... Plaintiff-Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | Vs.
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Bangladesh Railway and
Judgment 			 | others............
November 19, 1990. 	 | ..Defendant-Respondent*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Section 115

A revisional court acts beyond its jurisdiction in
setting aside concurrent finding of fact, when there is
no misreading and misappreciation of the evidence
on record.

Mahmudul Islam, Advocate, instructed by Santi
Ranjan Karmaker, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellant.

Shaheed Alam, Advocate, instructed by Md.
Sajjadul Huq, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 1.

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 2 & 3.

Judgment .

Latifur Rahman J: This appeal by the
plaintiff is directed against the judgment and order of
the High Court Division passed in Civil Revision
No. 1247 of 1982, setting aside the concurrent
judgment and decree of the Court of Additional
District Judge, 3rd Court, Mymensingh passed in
Money Appeal No. 7 of 1978 affirming the
judgment and decree passed by the Subordinate
Judge, 4th Court, Mymensingh in Money Suit No.
4 of 1975 decreeing the suit.

2. Plaintiff filed the suit for recovery of Taka
15,391.20 paisa against the defendants, Bangladesh
Railway for the price of lost goods. Plaintiff who is
a cloth dealer of Sherpur town purchased some
Khaddar Shirtings and Chaddars of different varieties
from Comilla town through his employee. Nani
Gopal Das and booked the said purchased cloth for


*Civil Appeal No. 47 of 1986. 

(From the judgment and order dated 30th July,
1985 passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka
Bench, in Civil Revision No. 1247 of 1982).

Jamalpur Town by Railway Parcel from Comilla
The parcel was to be delivered to the plaintiff at
Jamalpur Railway Station. The parcel goods having
not been delivered to the plaintiff in spite of repeated
demand and enquiries, the plaintiff filed the suit after
serving notices upon the defendants.

3. Defendants contested the suit, contending,
inter alia, that the consignment in question having
been stolen in a running train between Gouripur
Railway Station and Mymensingh Railway Station,
the loss cannot be attributed to any negligence and
misconduct of the Railway servant and its agents
dealing with the said parcel and as such the Railway
is not liable to pay for the loss. Defendants’ case, is
that, they took proper care in carrying the goods in
transit as bailee and there being no gross negligence
on the part of the Railway the suit is liable to be 
dismissed.

4. The material question for consideration in
this case is, whether the loss of the consignment in
question was due to theft committed in the running
train without any negligence and collusion of the
Railway Officials who were on duty at the relevant
train.

5. Mr. Mahmudul Islam, learned Advocate
appearing for the plaintiff-appellant, submits that
both the courts below having concurrently found
that the theft of the consignment in question could
not have taken place without the negligence and
connivance of the railway employees who were on
duty at the relevant time, the learned single Judge of
the High Court Division sitting in revision acted
beyond its jurisdiction in setting aside the concurrent
finding of fact of the courts below.

6. Itis not disputed that the goods in question .
were booked with Bangladesh Railway and supposed
to reach the destination as railway parcel. Plaintiff
has adduced evidence by examining himself to show
that the goods were handed over to the Railway and 
the Railway was supposed to take proper care in
carrying the goods in transit as bailed. Defendants
have examined seven witnesses to prove the theft of
the parcel from the running train between Gouripur
Railway Station and Mymensingh Railway Station. -
Both the courts below disbelieved the story of theft
of goods in question from the running train by
breaking open the strong and big size lock of the
Luggage Van having no handles and footboards. The
courts below on consideration of the entire evidence

            
             on record found that it was not possible to break
open the lock in a running train which had no handle
and footboard. Further, the parcel van being very
close to the guard's compartment, the theft of the
goods as deposed by DW 3 Kamal Chandra Das, the
Railway Guard who was in the train at the relevant
time, was not acceptable. The lower appellate court
further considered a very strong circumstance that if
theft would have been committed in a running train
then the thieves could not have taken only this
particular parcel leaving aside other items of goods
which were in the luggage van. Thus, the trial Court
as well as the lower appellate court disbelieved the
material witnesses of the defendant and found that the
loss of goods occurred due to utter negligence and
misconduct of the guard, DW 3 Kamal Chandra Das.

‘It was further found that the connivance and
complicity of the Railway employees cannot be
ruled out in the facts of the present case for which
the plaintiff cannot suffer for no fault of his own and
consequently decreed the suit.

7. Mr. Shaheed Alam, learned Advocate
appearing for the respondent-railway, submits that
the learned single judge of the High Court Division
correctly found that the findings of the courts below
are based on pure surmises and conjectures and not
on the evidence on record.

8. In the view of the evidence that has been led
in the case, both the trial and the appellate courts
after due consideration of the materials on record
came to positive findings that it is hardly believable
that such a theft in the running train could have been
Committed without the negligence and collusion of
the Railway officials. This finding is based on due
Consideration of the evidence on record and is not a
Product of surmise and conjecture. Hence Mr.
Shaheed Alam's contention fails. Thus, Mr.
Mahmudul Islam is correct in submitting that the
revisional court acted beyond it's jurisdiction in
Selling aside the concurrent finding of fact, when
there is no misreading and misappreciation of the
evidence on record. Consequently, the judgment of
the High Court Division is set aside and the suit is
decreed. The appeal is allowed with costs,

Ed. :

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed    | The State, represented by
CJ, MH Rahman J,     | the Solicitor to the Govern-
ATM Afzal J, Mustafa | ment of the People's
Kamal J and-Latifur  | Republic of Bangladesh
Rahman J. 		   | ........Appellant
			   | Vs.
Judgment 		   | Ashraf Ali alias Ashraf &
November 14, 1990,   | another....... Respondents*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 417

Review of evidence—The reason given by the
Judges of the High Court Division to disregard the
evidence of PWs 2, 3 & 4 relying only upon the
evidence of PW 7 is rather artificial. In an appeal by
the State against acquittal it is quite open to the
Court to review the evidence in order to see whether
finding on which acquittal is based is perverse being
in wanton disregard of good and unblemished
evidence given by other witnesses,

If the reasons given for acquittal are of "speculative or
artificial nature" or the findings are based on misreading of
evidence or the conclusion drawn from the evidence is
perverse resulting in miscarriage of justice, the court of
appeal will certainly interfere. This view was taken by the
Pakistan Supreme Court in the case of Golam Mohammad
Vs, Sharif, 21 DLR (SC) 206.

B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellant.

Sirajul Huq, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court,
instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-
on-Record — For the Respondents.

Judgment

_ Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: This appeal by
special leave calls in question an order of the High
Court Division, in appeal, acquitting the two
accused-respondents, who, along with another, had
been. convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge,

——————————————————
*Criminal Appeal No. 38 of 1986.

_ (From the judgment and order dated 26.1.1986
passed by the High Court Division, Rangpur Bench,

in Criminal Appeal No. 285 of 1983).

            
            Pabna, under sections 302/34 Ponal Code and
sentenced to transpositions foe life,

2. Prosecution case arises from an incident in
Which Motizuddin (deceased) Chairman of Majpara
Union Parishad, PS Atghoria was killed in a brutal
manner, On the relevant day, 5 September 1976, the
Chairman, along with a number of people including
his nephew Sayeed Al Mondal, was returning home
from Chatmohar Station hat by boat at about 8-30
PM. When his boat reached a place in-between
Gokulnagar and Mathura ghat, about 20/25 persons,
variously armed with "Kata rifles and daggers,
confronted the boat from both sides of the river and
asked the boatman to stop plying. Some of them
rushed to the boat At this the Chairman jumped
into the water but hardly had he proceeded 4 or 5
cuhits when he was overtaken and caught by the
Miscreants who started assaulting and dragging him
towards Mathurapur ghat, Some of his companions
recognised tour of the miscreants, such as, accused
Akbar, Ashrat, Abul Khair and Abdul Matin in the
moon-light, The Chairman could not be traced out.
during the night. The matter was reported to
members of the Chairman's family immediately and
on the following day a nephew of the Chairman (PW
1 Monwar Hossain) lodged First Information Report
at the Police Station naming these four accused as
the assailants, In course of investigation by the
Police, accused Akbar made a statement to the
Investigating Officer and in pursuance of the
statement he led the Investigating officer to a
bamboo clump near Mathura ghat and dug out the
dead body of the Chairman from under the clump.
Accused Akbar was then produced before a
Magistrate to whom he made a confession
implicating himself and two others, The Assistant
Surgeon of Pabna Sadar Hospital held autopsy on
the dead body of the Chairman, identified by his son
and others, and gave a report to the effect that death
resulted from multiple stab-injuries found in the dead
body. In due course, these four accused were put on
trial before the Additional Sessions Judge, Pabna, on
a charge under sections 302/34 of the Penal Code for
committing the murder of the Chairman, Mofizuddin
in prosecution of their common intention, They
pleaded not guilty taking the defence that the
Chairman had many enemies some of whom-might
have killed him. The learned Additional Sessions
Judge, on. consideration of the evidence of 15
witnesses examined by the prosecution and 3
witnesses examined by the defence, acquitted accused
Abul Khair giving him benefit of doubt and
convicted three others, Akbar, Ashraf and Matin and
sentenced them to transportation for life, by an order
dated 30 June 1983, Accused Akbar did not file any
appeal against his conviction; accused Ashraf and
Matin filed an appeal, Criminal Appeal No. 285 of
1983, which was allowed and they were acquitted by
the High Court Division as stated above.

3. Leave was granted to consider whether the
learned Judges of the High Court Division were well
founded .in law and fact in acquitting the
accused-respondents, relying upon the evidence of a
single witness, PW 7, who did not corroborate three
other witnesses, namely PWs 2, 3 and 4 who
deposed to have recognised the assailants on the spot
in moon light.

4. Mr. B Hossain, learned Deputy Attorney.
General, has taken us through the entire depositions
recorded in this case and has contended that
participation in the murder of the deceased Chairman
by the accused-respondents were very satisfactorily
proved by the direct evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 4, but
the learned Judges of the High Court Division on an
erroncous view discarded their evidence, solely
because another witness could not recognise them.
He has referred to the conduct of that witness (PW 7)
and has argued that this witness was not acquainted
with the Chairman but was interested only to save
his life by fleeing away without taking notice as to
the fate of others including the Chairman when
attacked by the armed miscreants.

5. As appears clearly, the time, place and
manner of occurrence is found to have been
satisfactorily proved by PWs 2 to 4 and others, and
there is also no dispute about it. PW 12, Inspector
of Police, deposed that he recovered the dead body of
the Chairman and PW 14; Assistant Surgeon, held
post mortem examination thereon, identified by PW
5 and others and gave evidence that the death of the
Chairman resulted from stab injuries, which were’
antemortem and homicidal in nature. The question
therefore is whether these two respondents were
among the assailants of the Chairman. It appears
that a feeble attempt was made by the defence during
the trial to say that the dead body having been
recovered six days after the occurrence, it was highly
decomposed, beyond recognition, and as such the

            
            eviidence of identification could not be relied upon.
but on consideration of the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 es and others including a son of the deceased, the
learned Additional Sessions Judges correctly held that
the dead body was recognizable and that it was
identified to be the dead body of deceased Chairman,
Mofizuddin.

6. PW 2, Sayeed Ali Mondal, a neighbour,
pw 3 Abu Sayeed Mondal, a nephew and PW 4,
Abul Hossain alias Abdul, another neighbour of the
Chairman, were in the company of the chairman
while returning from the Chatmohar hat by a boat of
which PW 7 was one of the boatmen. They have
deposed that from both sides of the river about 20 to
45 persons variously armed, fell upon the boat, that
the Chairman jumped into the water out of fear but
hardly had the Chairman proceeded 4 to 5 cubits
from the boat then he was caught by four miscreants
(as mentioned before) who dragged him towards
Mathuranagar ghat assaulting him all the way. They
have claimed to have recognised the four accused in
moon-light. Their presence in the boat was not
challenged by the defence who however gave the
suggestion that there was a bamboo clump on the
bank of the river which produced a shadow due to
which recognition of the assailants was not possible.
This suggestion they denied outright. It is these
witnesses who claimed to have rushed to the
“Chairman's house to give this information to
members of Chairman's family including his sons
PWs 5 and 6 and his nephew, PW 1. It is PW 1,
who, after hearing from the witnesses, went to the
Police Station on the following day and lodged an
ejahar. Mr. Sirajul Huq, learned Counsel for the
accused-respondents, has pointed out that PW 4 did
Not specifically name in his deposition the persons
Who were in the company of the Chairman in the
boat, and as such, presence of PWs 2 and 3 in the
boat is doubtful. This witness is found to be a
competent and disinterested witness. When he said
that he, along with "Chairman and others", was
returning from the hat by a boat, non-mentioning of
names of "others", particularly when "others" already
deposed, it appears to be an innocuous omission.
3 is another nephew of the deceased but PW 2 is
not his relation; but Mr. Sirajul Hug contends that
presence of PW 2 in the boat is also doubtful as his
name was Not given in the ejahar. But the ‘ejahar’ in
this case was lodged by a person who did not see the
incident but who heard about it from others, namely,
PWs 2, 3 and 4. PW 3 specifically mentioned PW 2
whose name is also the same “Sayeed Ali”. PWs 2,
3 and 4 reported the incident to PW 1 immediately
after the occurrence. He lodged the first information
report within 20 hours of the incident. Accused
Akbar, who did not file any appeal before the High
Court Division, led the Police (PW 12) to a bamboo
clump and brought out the dead body of the
Chairman on 10.9.76 and then made a confessional
statement to the Magistrate PW 13; but the ejahar
was lodged long before these facts came out i.e on
6.9.76. The only suggestion to PWs 2, 3 and 4 is
that they could not recognise the appellants because
of shadow of bamboo clumps but they denied it.

7. PW7 was one of the boatmen. His house is
7 or 8 miles from the house of the Chairman whom
he did not know from before. He deposed that as
soon as armed persons from both banks of the river
directed them to stop plying the boat, he got
frightened and jumped into water, that "many persons
after the incident went to the Chairman's house when
it was found that only the Chairman was missing”.
In answer to a question by the defence he said “I
could not recognise anyone. I had heard nothing
regarding recognition of any person in the house of
the Chairman”. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division discussed his evidence thus; "PW 7, the
man who was plying the boat and an eye-witness of
the occurrences, has deposed to the effect that when
they reached Gokulnagar ghat 12 persons from the _
banks of the river directed them to stop plying the
boat and being frightened they all jumped into the
water. He further stated that save and except
Mafizuddin Chairman they all rushed to the house of
the Chairman on the very night of the occurrence and
there was an uproar for the absence of the Chairman.
He has admitted in his cross-examination that he
could not recognise anybody and he did not hear
anything regarding recognition of any of the accused
persons in the house of the Chairman. The witness
is not related to anybody and he is an independent and
dis-interested witness. There is nothing to disbelieve
the straight forward evidence of PW 7, the boatman.
So in view of the evidence of PW 7 the story of
recognition of the accused persons by PWs 2, 3 and
4 should not be relied upon".

8. It appears that since PW 7 did not see or
hear anything about recognition, the learned Judges

            
            disbelieved PWs 2, 3 and 4. Mr. B Hossain contends
that from the nature of the evidence of PW 7, it
appears he has not disclosed facts known to him; but
on this point the prosecution did not cross examine
him, with court's permission, under section 154 of
the Evidence Act. That PW 7 did not recognise
anybody does not mean that other witnesses also did
not or could not recognise anybody. This witness
being unknown to the Chairman it was quite natural
for him to jump into the river at once and flee away
without looking for Chairman's fate. Evidence of
other witnesses is that the Chairman jumped from
the boat and proceeded 4 to 5 cubits away when he
was caught and dragged by the miscreants. In the
circumstances, PW 7 might not have recognised the
miscreants but why the evidence of PW 2, 3 and 4
who claimed to have recognised the known persons
will be disbelieved. As to whether he heard about it
at the house of Chairman, admittedly a great number
of persons of the locality assembled by then and this
witness being unacquainted with the people of the
locality might not have taken any interest in the
matter to enquire about recognition. His statement
that he did not hear anything about recognition
cannot be a ground for disbelieving the other
witnesses who claimed to have recognised the
assailants, The reason given by the learned judges for
discarding the evidence of the eye-witnesses is not
tenable and justified; it is rather speculative in nature.

9. Mr. Sirajul Huq contends that after taking
into consideration all aspects of the case the High
Court Division found that evidence of the
eye-witnesses is not reliable and on that finding
acquitted the accused. This finding, he argues, cannot
be said to be perverse, or the result of gross
misappreciation of evidence justifying interference
with the acquittal. While agreeing with the learned
Counsel that an order of acquittal should not be
interfered with lightly, but if the acquittal is based
on perverse finding, we are of the opinion that this
Court in that case should interfere. The learned
Judges are found to have gravely erred in discarding
the evidence of the eye-witnesses simply because
another witness did not support them. We therefore
find no reason to disbelieve the evidence of PWs 2, 3
and 4 who claimed to have recognised the
respondents, along with others and hearing from
whom the ejahar was lodged by PW 1 within a
reasonable time. The reason given by the learned
judges to discard the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 4
relying only upon the evidence of PW 7 is rather
artificial. In an appeal by the State against aquital
it is quite open to the Court to review the evidence
in order to see whether finding on which acquital
has been based is perverse being wanton disregard of good and unblemished evidence given by Other
witnesses who got no grudge or enmity Whatever
with the accused. If the reasons given for aquital
are of "speculative or artificial nature" or the
findings are based on misreading of evidence or the
conclusion drawn from the evidence is perverse
resulting in miscarriage of justice, the court of
appeal will certainly interfere. This view was taken -
by the Pakistan Supreme Court in the case of
Golam Mohammad Ys. Sharif, 21 DLR (SC) 206. 

10. In the instant case, besides the direct
evidence of recognition there is a confessional
statement of the co-accused, Akbar, who did not
prefer any appeal before the High Court. The
confessional statement was held to be true and
voluntary by the trial Court. In that confessional
statement accused respondent Ashraf has been named
as one of the assailants. Under section 30 of the
Evidence Act this statement may be considered in
the case of co-accused Ashraf, though, but for the
direct evidence of recognition, the confessional
statement of the co-accused carries no evidentiary
value. In conclusion, we find that conviction of
respondents Ashraf and Matin was wrongly set aside
by the High Court Division. The appeal is therefore
allowed and the order of acquittal is set aside. They
are convicted under sections 302/34 of the Penal
Code and sentenced to imprisonment for life. They
are directed to surrender to their bail bonds at once
failing which the. Deputy Commissioner will get
them arrested.

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)
shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Tayeb Ali...
MH Rahman J, Mustafa  | .......Appellant
Kamal J and Latifur   |
Rahman J.		    | Vs.
Judgment 		    | Abdul Khaleque and
November 27, 1990.    | others....Respondents*

specific Relief Act (I of 1877)
section 42

Maintainability of suit—The suit being one for
declaration of title to an unspecified share of an
undivided plot of land on the basis of gift and there
being no evidence that the donor thereof was in

exclusive possession at any time, is not
maintainable without a prayer for partition. .....(12)
NH Khandkar, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellant.
SR Pal, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court,
instructed by Md. Aftab Hossain,

Advocate-on-Record— For the Respondent No. 1.
Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 2-10.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: This is the plaintiff's
appeal from the second appellate judgment and decree
of a learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division, Comilla Bench dated 15-5-83 in SA No.
 471 of 1973 allowing the appeal and dismissing the
Suit, thereby setting aside the concurrent judgments
and decrees of the learned Subordinate Judge, 2nd
Additional Court, Sylhet in Title Appeal No. 141 of
1970 dated 1-6-72 and of the leaned Munsif, 3rd
Court, Habiganj in Title Suit No. 207 of 1969 dated
26-12-69, decreeing the suit.

2. The plaintiff's TS No. 207 of 1969 of the
3rd Court of Munsif, Habiganj (originally TS No.
82 of 1968 of the 4th Court) was for a declaration
of his jote right in 20 decimals of suit land by gift

~ *Civil Appeal No. 42 of 1985.

(From the judgment and order dated 15.5.1983
Passed by the High Court Division, Comilla Bench, in
SA No. 471 of 1973). : |

of 6 pies share, confirmation of possession or
recovery of possession if dispossessed during the
pendency of the suit and for permanent injunction,

3. There are some admitted aspects of the case.
The suit land, along with other lands, belonged to
two brothers Abdul Hashim and Abdul Jabbar,
predecessor of present defendant Nos, 4-9 in equal
shares. Abdul Hashim and defendant Nos. 4-9
instituted TS No. 1 of 1962 against the plaintiff and
his brother as defendant Nos. 1 and 2 for declaration
of title to the present suit land and other lands and
recovery of possession and mesne profit. The suit
was decreed and the said defendants’ appeal was
dismissed. Upon the death of Abdul Hashim his
heirs, the present defendant Nos. 1-3, were made
parties in Title Execution Case No. 5 of 1967, The
present defendant No. 10, one of the two wives of
Abdul Hashim, was not made a party to the
execution proceedings. She instituted Misc, Case
No. 16 of 1968 under the then existing section 47 of
the Code of Civil Procedure and it was resisted by
the decree-holders on the ground that defendant No,
10 was a divorced wife of Abdul Hashim, and so she
inherited nothing. It was held in the Miscellaneous
case that defendant No. 10 was not formally divorced
by Abdul Hashim, but then she was not a necessary
party to the execution proceeding as she along with
the decree-holders represent the same decree-holder.
Section 47 did not apply. Consequently defendant
Nos. 1-9 of the present suit got delivery of
possession from the judgment-debtors of that suit
not only of the suit land but also of other lands
covered by TS No. 1 of 1962 on 4-8-68 which was
confirmed on 19-8-68.

4. It is the plaintiffs case that he is a distant
grandson of present defendant No. 10. During the
pendency of the said execution case defendant No. 10
had gifted to him on the 2nd Sravan, 1375 BS,
corresponding to 18-7-68 her undivided share of 6
pie i.e, the suit 20 decimals of land by a registered
hiba-bil-ewaz. His donor was in exclusive
possession thereof and she inducted him into
possession of the suit land and the plaintiff is in
possession thereof on that account. Defendants made
an attempt to dispossess him, Hence the suit,

5. Defendant No. 4, the contesting defendant,
contended that defendant No. 10 was the divorced
wife of Abdul Hashim, so she did not inherit
anything from Abdul Hashim. The hiba-bil-ewaz
was collusively entered into between defendant No.

            
            10 and the plaintiff during the pendency of the
execution proceedings with a view to creating
difficulties in the way of the decree-holders' getting
possession in TS No. 1 of 1962.

6. Both the Courts below concurrently held
that the suit was not barred by res judicata, that it
was maintainable, that defendant No. 10 was not
formally divorced by Abdul Hashim, that she was
entitled to 6 pies share as an heir of Abdul Hashim
and that the hiba-bil-ewaz was genuine and acted
upon, The two Courts below concurrently decreed
the suit, except the prayer for confirmation of
possession and permanent injunction.

7. The High Court Division reversed the
concurrent judgments on the finding that the first
appellate Court totally misconceived the pleadings
and misread the evidence on record. In view of the
admitted facts of the case it is inconceivable that
defendant No. 10 had any exclusive possession of the
suit land, whether before or after the decree passed in
TS No. 1 of 1962. The plaintiff obtained an
unspecified share of 6 pie said to be that of defendant
No. 10 in the property left by Abdul Hashim. In the
absence of a suit for partition, the alleged share of
defendant No. 10 or the plaintiff cannot be
determined.

8. Leave was granted to consider the
plaintiff-appellant's submission that the suit was
instituted specifying 20 decimals of land of the
plaintiff's share in the Schedule of the plaint butted
and bounded by definite demarcation and therefore the
plaintiff was entitled to a relief without praying for
partition.

9. Mr. NH Khandker, learned Advocate
on-Record for the appellant, submits that the suit
land was not only well-demarcated and
well-delineated in the plaint, but was exclusively
possessed by defendant No. 10 who delivered
possession thereof to the plaintiff. He submits that
the High Court Division acted erroneously in
holding that a partition suit was necessary,

10. Unfortunately, these submissions do not
carry Mr. Khandker very far. Admittedly, the
Plaintiff's case is that defendant No. 10 inherited 6
pics share in her husband Abdul Hashim's property
after his death, not during his lifetime. The trial
Court finds that in TS No. 1 of 1962 it was held
that the defendants of that suit dispossessed the
Plaintiff of that suit from the present suit land and
other lands in 1367 BS, vide Ext. A, the judgement
There is absolutely no evidence that defendant no.
10 exclusively possessed her specific share Of 6 pics
from before the decree in TS No. 1 of 1962, Abdul
Hashim and others originally filed TS No, 1 of 1962
for confirmation of possession. During the Pendency
of the suit they were dispossessed. The Plaint was
amended and a prayer for recovery of Possession and
mesne profit was incorporated. Abdul Hashim died
it appears, after the decree and the appeal. His heirs
defendant Nos, 1-3, were made parties in the
execution proceedings. So Abdul Hashim died when
he was already dispossessed of the suit land and Other
lands. There can be no question of inheritance of
Abdul Hashim's properties by his heirs and
successors, including defendant No. 10, during his 
lifetime, Question of inheritance arises only after
Abdul Hashim's death, which took place after the
decree in TS No. 1 of 1962. And there can be no
question of partitioning Abdul Hashim's properties
amicably or by metes and bounds between his heirs
and successors before the decree-holders took 
possession of the suit land and other lands on 4-8-68 in Title Execution Case No. 5 of 1967, As already
stated, there is no averment and no evidence either
that defendant No. 10 possessed any specific portion of Abdul Hashim's properties before his death, i.e.
before the decree in TS No. 1 of 1962 or before he
was dispossessed by the present plaintiff and his
brother in 1367 BS. There is no escape from the
conclusion of the High Court Division that it is
inconceivable in the admitted facts of the case that
defendant No. 10 had any exclusive possession of 1
the suit land, either before or after the decree passed in TS No. 1 of 1962. The High Court Division was
right also in holding that the lower appellate Court
misread the evidence on record in that defendant No. 10 was not at all a party to Title Execution Case
No. 5 of 1967 and therefore she could not have taken
possession of the suit land on 4-8-68 along with the
decree-holders of TS No. 1 of 1962. There is also
misconception of pleadings on the part of the lower
appellate Court in that the plaintiff never claimed
defendant No, 10 to be in possession of the suit land
in pursuance of the execution case. It was his case
that defendant No. 10 was in exclusive possession of
the suit land independent of the decree of that suit, a
claim not supported by evidence. 

11. It is therefore not enough that the plaintiff
had delineated and demarcated the suit land in the


            
            paint. It was also necessary for him to prove that
defendant No. 10 was in exclusive possession
thereof. The trial Court held that on the date of
execution of the hiba-bil-ewaz, 18-7-68, the plaintiff
was in possession of the suit land as a dispossessor
or trespasser, but on and from 18-7-68, his
possession was that of a donee. This finding is
contradictory to the plaint case. The plaintiff averred
that his donor was in exclusive possession of the
suit Jand at the time of hiba. She inducted him into
possession and the plaintiff is in possession on that
account. That case has been: demolished by the trial
Court itself. The lower appellate Court has not dwelt
on his aspect of the case.

12. We find nothing wrong in the High Court
Division 's finding that the suit being one for
declaration of title to an unspecified 6 pies share of
an undivided plot of land and there being. no evidence
that the donor thereof was in exclusive possession at
any time the present suit is not maintainable
without a prayer for partition.

Hence the appeal is dismissed without costs.
Ed.




SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,  | Afruz Miah (Md) and
MH Rahman J, 	     | another........
ATM Afzal J, Mustafa   | ...Defendant-Appellants
Kamal J and Latifur    | Vs.
Rahman J. 		     | Al-haj Md. Siraj Miah
Judgment 		     | being dead his legal heirs:
			     | Karimunnessa and others
Judgement 		     |
August 5, 1990         | ...Plaintiff-Respondents*
Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. VI r. 17

Amendment of plaint—When it means no
substitution of one cause of action for another—The
impugned transfer of shares of the plaintiff having
taken place during the period of insanity of the
plaintiff, it is necessary to dispose of the same
within the framework of the suit for declaration.
Insanity being the foundation of the suit plaintiff
can legitimately combine in one suit all the alleged
illegalities committed by the appellant in the matter
of transfer of the shares in question and other
properties. This is not substitution of one cause of,
action for another, but a consolidation of all wrongs
allegedly done to the plaintiff. -

—Amendment of plaint—conflict of
decisions—If the plaintiff had to file separate suits
challenging different alienations during the period of
his insanity, it will involve proving insanity in each
suit which might lead to conflict of decisions. This
is least desirable. .

—Amendment of plaint—a corollary to addition
of party—The plaintiff added 3 other ‘defendants as
parties after filing: of the suit and prayed for relief.
The addition of parties is corollary to the amendment
sought for. It no way changes the complexion of the
suit. MM OST ANGO. ks 11(c)

—Amendment of ‘plaint—Delay—Appellants

- having not filed written statement in the suit the delay of

10 months in seeking amendment after the knowledge
of transfer of the shares in question is not material as it
will not prejudice them in any way.

~ *Civil Appeal No. 85 of 1989. ~
(From the judgment.and order dated 29.8.1989
passed by the High Court Division, Sylhet Bench in
Civil Revision No. 103 of 1985).

            
            Companies Act (VII of 1913)
Section 38

Although section 38 of the Companies Act
empowers the Company Court to rectify share
register it is well-settled that a suit is not barred
thereby, especially when detailed evidence is to be
taken to settle issue of fact.

Dr. Kamal Hossain, Senior Advocate, instructed
by Kazi Shahabuddin Ahmed, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Appellants.

Mainul Hosein, Advocate, (Md. Joynul Abedin,
Advocate with him), instructed. by Md. Aftab
Hossain, Advocate-on-Record— For the Respondent
Nos. I(a) to I(e).

Not Represented — Respondent Nos. 2-8.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J : This appeal by special
leave at the instance of the defendants is directed
against the judgment of the High Court Division,
Sylhet Bench, Sylhet in Civil Revision No. 103 of
1985 affirming the order of the Subordinate Judge,
e Sylhet allowing the respondent's application for
. amendment of the plaint under Order 6 rule 17 of the
Code of Civil Procedure..

2. The relevant fact that will be necessary for
disposal of this appeal, is that, the deceased plaintiff
Al-haj Md. Siraj Miah (now substituted by his heirs)
filed the present suit (Title Suit No. 358.of 1982)
for a declaration that the deed of partition dated
1.7.81 is illegal, fraudulent, void and not binding
upon the plaintiff and for permanent injunction.

3. The plaint case is that the said deceased
Siraj Miah, the eldest brother of appellant No. 1, had
hotel/restaurant business in UK and with the
earnings in the said business he purchased the land in
Sylhet town and constructed building thereon.
Thereafter, deceased Siraj Miah started hotel business
in the said building under the name and style."Hotel
Al-Amin" which is a private limited company named
Hotel Al-Amin Limited. Although deceased Siraj
Miah established the hotel business. with his own
money but out of love and affection he gave his
younger brother i.e appellant No. 1 Md. Afruz Miah-
some shares in the said hotel business in order to
establish him in life. Deceased Siraj Miah himself
held 600 shares in the said hotel and became the
permanent and life-time Managing Director of the 
said private limited company. During the early Part
of 1980 deceased Siraj Miah suffered from complete
nervous break-down hearing the news that appellant
No. 1 misappropriated huge amount of money from
his restaurant business in UK taking advantage of
the absence of Siraj Miah from UK. Deceased Siraj
Miah remained under medical treatment in UK and
on return to Bangladesh he was also under the
medical treatment of Dr. AA Munib, Associate
Professor of Psychiatry, Sylhet Medical College
from 25.8.80 to 12.4.82 and during this period he
was completely of unsound mind. It is stated in the
plaint that taking advantage of his mental illness
appellant No. 1 in collusion with others created a
false deed of partition on 1.7.81 to grab the property
of deceased Siraj Miah including the land and
building of the said ""Hotel Al-Amin" After 
recovering from his illness and after having come to
know of this fraudulent partition deed deceased Siraj 
Miah during his life time filed the present suit. 

4. Deceased Siraj Miah also filed a petition for
temporary injunction and appellant No. 1 filed a 
written objection on 7.2.83 stating, inter alia, that 
deceased Siraj Miah transferred his 100 shares in the 
said hotel to appellant No. 2, the son of appellant 
No. 1 and his remaining 500 shares of the said hotel
to Mst. Mashuda Khatun, wife of appellant No.1
on 27.6.81 to 3.7.81 respectively. In the written
objection it was stated that the said transfer was
approved by the resolutions of the Board of Directors
and the same was intimated to the Registrar, Joint
Stock Companies for information.

5. Deceased Siraj Miah denied such transfer of
shares in favour of the wife and son of defendant No.
1 by filing a reply stating that the said transfer has
been made fraudulently by appellant No. 1 after
obtaining his signature during his period of
insanity.

6. Deceased Siraj Miah having learnt about the
transfer of these aforesaid shares for the first time on
7.2.1983 filed the application for amendment of the
plaint on 3.12.83 seeking. to incorporate in the
plaint that appellant No. 1 in collusion with other
defendants illegally and fraudulently transferred 600
shares of deceased Siraj Miah. Apart from the
original declaration that the partition deed is
fraudulent, a further declaration by amendment was
sought for that the so-called transfer of 600 shares of




            deceased Siraj Miah in Hotel Al-Amin Ltd. is
fraudulent, collusive, illegal and void and that
deceased Siraj Miah is the permanent and life
Managing Director of said private limited company.

7. The trial Court allowed the amendment by
an order dated 16.3.85 and on revision the High
Court Division, Sylhet Bench, affirmed the order of
the trial Court by judgment and order dated 29.8.89
in Civil Revision No. 203 of 1989.

8. Leave was granted to consider whether the
amendment that has been sought to be incorporated
changes the nature and character of the suit.

9. Dr. Kamal Hossain, learned counsel
appearing for the defendant-appellant, submits that
the learned Single Judge of he High Court Division
acted wrongly in affirming the order of amendment
of the plaint which changes the nature and character
of the suit fundamentally by adding 3 new parties,
a by introducing new and inconsistent cause of action
and also by*introducing a new and different
subject-matter altogether. The proposed amendment
will change the entire complexion of the suit, he
contends. Also, there is a delay of 10 months in the
"prayer for amendment from the date of disclosure.
The proposed amendment will widen and enlarge the
scope of the suit and will saddle the appellants with
the additional burden of adducing evidence on matters
not connected with partition. )

10. At the outset it is to be stated that in the
 plaint it has been stated not only that the deed o
Partition was brought into being fraudulently and
illegally on 1.7.81 during the period of mental
insanity of deceased Siraj Miah, but also that he held’
600 shares and was the life-time Managing Director
Of the said private limited company. It now appears:
from the application, for amendment of the plaint
that during the period of mental insanity, 600 shares
of deceased Siraj Miah were allegedly illegally
transferred by appellant No. 1. And such a
declaration to that effect has not been sought to the
effect that the alleged transfer of shares is illegal etc.,
And that deceased Siraj Miah: is the life-time
Managing Director of the said Hotel. Al-Amin
limited.

11. Thus the allegation is that the aforesaid
activities relating to the alleged transfer of shares
Also took place during the period of alleged insanity
Of deceased Siraj Miah and during this period the
Partition deed was also allegedly created as alleged in
the plaint. The allegedly fraudulent transfer of shares
having allegedly taken place during the period of
alleged insanity of deceased Siraj Miah, it is
necessary in our view to dispose of the same within
the frame-work of the same suit to avoid
multiplicity of suits. Insanity from
25.8.1980-12.4.82 being the foundation of the suit
deceased plaintiff can legitimately combine in one
suit all the alleged illegalities committed by
appellant No. 1 in the matter of transfer of his
shares and other properties. This is not substitution
of one cause of action for another, but a
consolidation, of all-wrongs allegedly done to the
deceased plaintiff by appellant No. 1. It will not
change the nature and character of the suit at all, nor
will it widen the suit and impose upon this
appellants any additional burden of adducing evidence
on unrelated matters. If the deceased plaintiff had to
file-separate suits challenging different alienations.
during the period of his alleged insanity, ‘he would
have had to prove insanity. separately in each suit,
which might lead to conflict of decisions, which is
least desirable. Since after filing of the suit, the
deceased plaintiff came to know of this allegedly
illegal and fraudulent transfer of shares, the deceased
plaintiff impleaded 3 other defendants as parties and
prayed for the relief. The addition of parties is
corollary to the amendment sought for. It no way
changes the complexion of the suit. The appellants,
have not yet filed written statement in the suit.
Hence the delay of 10 months is not material as it
will not prejudice the appellants in any way.
Although, section 38, of the Companies, Act
empowers the Company Court to rectify share
register, it is well-settled that a suit is not barred
thereby, especially: when detailed evidence is to be
taken to settle issue of fact. In this case the
allegation’ of insanity cannot be: decided without
taking evidence and a trial of this basic issue in the
same suit appears to be the appropriate remedy.

12. The High Court Division having properly
exercised its judicial discretion in the matter on the
facts of the present case, the same suffers from no
illegality. 
In the result, the appeal: is dismissed without
any order as to costs.

Ed. ,

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Criminal)
MH Rahman J, ATM    | The State, represented by
Afzal J, Mustafa    | the Solicitor to the
Kamal J and Latifur | Government of the People's
Rahman J. 		  | Republic of Bangladesh
			  |.........Appellant
			  | Vs.
Judgment 		  | Md. Shafiqul Islam alias
December 12, 1990.  | Rafique and another...........
			  |..........Respondents*

Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 5

Chance witness—He is found to be at the place

of occurrence by chance or coincidence at the time.
the offence was committed. His evidence need not be
rejected outright, but it is to be weighed with
caution and may be viewed with suspicion if
witnesses are partisan or inimically disposed towards
the accused.

—Wife-killing case—In such a case, there could
be no eye-witness of the occurrence, apart from
inmates of the house who may refuse to tell the
truth. The neighbours may not also come forward to
depose. The prosecution is, therefore, necessarily to
, rely on circumstantial evidence.

In a case of this nature, like any other case of
circumstantial evidence, one normally starts looking for the
motive and the opportunity to commit the crime. The
prosecution case as to-motive, the deceased's failure to bring
home the promised articles of dowry from her father has not
been seriously challenged. PW 1 merely omitted to mention
one of the promised articles in the FIR. Where it is proved
that the wife died of assault in the house of her husband,
there would be strong suspicion against the husband that at
his hands the wife died. To make the husband liable, the
minimum fact that must be brought on record, either by
direct or circumstantial evidence, is that he was in the house
at the relevant time. In this case PW 1's statement that the
husband of the murdered wife was in his house on the date of
occurrence remains unchallenged. There is nothing on record


*Criminal Appeal No. 4 of 1988.

(From the judgment and order dated 10th
February, 1986 passed by the High Court Division,
Rangpur Bench, in Death Reference Case No. 6/83
with Criminal Appeal No. 191 of 1983 and Criminal Jail
Appeal No. 205/83)

to show that the husband took any step for alleviating his
wife's alleged colic pain or to inform his wife's relation,
after her alleged suicide. PW 8, the uncle of the Victim,
stated that the husband was not at home when his Wife's
dead body was taken away by the police. The husband's
continued abscondence from 20.3.82, the date of occurrence
till his surrender on 6.1.83, is by itself not conclusive 
either of his guilt or guilty conscience, but it lends weight
to the circumstantial evidence against him. :

Kasiruddin Sarkar Vs. State 24 DLR 164 held not
applicable. ......(10, 16-18) :
B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the |
Appellant. :

Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record—
For the Respondents.

Judgment

MH Rahman J : This appeal, at the instance
of the State, is directed against the judgment and 
order dated 10th March, 1986 of the High Court
Division, Rangpur Bench, passed in Death Reference 
Case No. 6 of 1983 rejection the reference and
setting aside the order of conviction and sentence
passed against the respondents by the Additional
Sessions Judge, First Court, Pabna in Sessions 
Case No. 300 of 1982. 

2. At the trial PW 1 Moked Ali, the 
informant, stated the prosecution case. His daughter
Meherunnessa was married to respondent No. 1 
Shafiqul Islam alias Rafique in 1979. PW1 promised
to give his son-in-law one bicycle and a two-in-one 
(tape recorder-cum-radio) in January, 1982.
Respondent No. 1 was at his home on leave in the
month of March, 1982. After taking his wife home 
on 10th March, 1982, he assaulted her at the 
instance of his father, respondent No. 2 Rahmat Ali,
a policeman, and her mother Ayesha Khatun, for not
bringing with her the promised articles of dowry.On
19th March 1982 Meher was again beaten by the
accused. PW 1's son Mizanur Rahman who was at 
the house of the respondents came back and told his
mother that his sister asked him to tell her that the
promised articles must be given otherwise she would
be killed. On the 20th March, 1982 PW 1's daughter
was brutally killed by the accused persons. On that
date PW 1 was serving at Pangsha, District
Faridpur. On the following day his nephew PW 11
Shahjahan informed him about the killing. PW 1
reached the house of respondent No. 1 at 5 PM and


            
            saw her daughter lying dead on the ground. He
noticed burning signs on her head, face, nose, and
lips and injury marks on different parts of her body.
He heard from PW 2 Moslemuddin, PW 3 Majed
Ali, PW 4 Wazeda Khatoon and PW 5 Rezia
Khatoon and others that the accused persons tortured
his daughter for his failure to comply with his
son-in-law's demand for the promised articles and
“that they conspired together to murder her. He
asserted that his daughter did not commit suicide and
that she was brutally killed and hanged, and that for
concealing the dead body the accused also dug out a
grave. The accused Mokbul, a constable, and a friend
and close neighbour of respondent No. 1, instituted
an unnatural death ease with the local Police Station
giving a false information that Meher committed
suicide. the police came to the spot and held inquest
on the dead body of Meher and forwarded the same to
Pabna Morgue for post-mortem examination. PW 1
went to the Police Station on 22nd March, 1982 for
lodging an information but the Officer-in-Charge
told him that he would accept the information after
the post-mortem report. On 3rd April, 1982 PW 1's
information was received by the Police. PW 1 stated
that he heard his daughter was hanged with her feet
touching the ground and her head a bit bent. He
further stated that out of fear or for other reasons PW
7 Abdus Sattar, brother-in law of respondent No. 2,
his wife PW 5 and his daughter PW 4, PW 12
Hashem, PW 23 Surajennessa, PW 14 Fatema who
are related to the accused, would not speak the truth.
3. The accused pleaded innocence. Their
defence is that Meherunnessa was a patient of colic
Pain, she suffered from typhoid and that she
committed suicide by hanging. |

4. The trial court convicted respondent No. 1
Under section 302 of the Penal-Code and sentenced
 him to death. Respondent No. 2 Rahmat Ali was
convicted under sections 302/114 of the Penal Code
and sentenced to transportation for life. Five other
“Accused were acquitted. . . :

5. The: prosecution examined fourteen
witnesses and‘tendered seven others. PW 2 and 4
were declared hostile.

6. In cross-examination PW 1 stated that he
did not give any explanation as to the delay in
lodging the First information Report and he did not
mention there about the cassette, the happening of
19th March and the accused's digging out a grave and
that his daughter was hanged with her feet touching
the ground and her head a bit bent.

7. There was no eye-witness in this case. The
High Court Division held that the circumstantial
evidence did not exclude the possibility of the
defence plea of innocence and, relying on Siraj Vs.
Crown, 9 DLR SC 177, acquitted the accused.

8. On behalf of the State it is contended that
the learned Judges of the High Court Division
misapplied the decision in9 DLR SC 177 in the
instant case as the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 9 show
the complicity of the accused persons resulting in
the death of the deceased on the date of occurrence.
Further, it is urged that the High Court Division fell
into error by not considering that the
accused-respondents did not give any plausible
reason as to how Meherunnessa was murdered at
their own residence when their case of suicide was
found by the High Court Division itself as blatantly
false.

In Siraj Vs. Crown 9 DLR (SC) 177, Munir CJ
observed: "If on the facts held proved no hypothesis
consistent with the innocence of the appellant can
be suggested, the conviction must be upheld. If,
however, such facts can be reconciled with any |
reasonable hypothesis compatible with the
innocence of the appellant, the case will have to be
treated as one of no evidence and the conviction and
sentence will in that case have to be quashed."

9. After quoting the above, passage the learned
judges hurriedly concluded without considering the
persecution case in depth that the circumstances in
the instant case do not exclude the possibility of
innocence of the accused.

10. The respondent has placed much reliance
on Kasiruddin Sarkar Vs. The State 24. DLR 164. In
that case the learned: Judges after ruling out the
husband's plea that his wife committed suicide gave
him a benefit. of doubt, but that was done after
taking pains in pointing out that there was more
than one possibility of involvement of assailant
other than the husband in the commission of the
murder.

11. -We have referred to the evidence of PW 1,
the informant earlier. Let us now consider the
evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 9. PW 2 Moslemuddin.
stated that on the day of occurrence at 8°PM on his
way back home from Sujanagar Bazar when he was

            
            passing by the house of Rahmat he heard a woman
entreating not to beat her and asking for water. He
advanced to the house of the accused Rahmat. PW 3
Majed Molla was with him. Rahmat resisted PWs 3
and 4 and asked them to go away. On the next day
PW 2 heard that Rahmat's daughter-in-law died by
committing suicide. PW 3 heard that she was killed
and hanged. PW 2 did not then meet PW 3. Each of
them saw the victim hanging with her feet touching
the ground and her head bent. In cross-examination
PW 2 denied that he was a bhagina of PW 1. PW 3
admitted that PW 2 calls him as a maternal uncle by
village courtesy. They did not tell before the IO the
exact words the victim, being assaulted, uttered. PW
9 Budai Sk also narrated a similar incident.

12. The High Court Division characterized the
three witnessess as chance witnesses and discarded
their evidence. The learned Judges commented that
they did not mention about any such incident to the
police. In face, they omitted only to disclose the
exact words of anguish the victim uttered when she
was assaulted by the accused persons.

13. A person deposing before Court is termed
as a chance witness when he is found to be at the
place of occurrence by chance or coincidence at the
time the offence was committed. The evidence of
such a witness need not to be rejected outright, but it
is to be weighed with caution and may be viewed
with suspicion if the witnesses are partisan or
inimically disposed towards the accused, or the
reason given by the witness for his being present at
the place of occurrence appears to be untrue. In this
case out of the three witnesses PW 2 and 3 are not
related to the informant and they were named in the
FIR. In any case, for the prosecution case the
evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 9 are not all that material.

14. The respondent relied on Criminal Appeal
No. 10 of 1987 of this Court (The State Vs
Mofazzal Hossain) where by a majority decision the
husband was acquitted of the charge of killing his
wife as the minimum evidence against him, that he
was in the house where his wife was murdered, was
lacking. It was held "In criminal cases section 106 of
the Evidence Act is attracted in exceptional cases
where a relevant fact is pre-eminently within the
knowledge of the accused. The rationale is simple. It
is just and proper that the accused is to prove a fact
that is especially within his knowledge because he
could do so without difficulty or inconvenience, and
for the prosecution it will be well-nigh impossible
or highly inconvenient to throw any light on such a
matter. However, by invoking the provision of
section 105 or 106 of the Evidence Act the
prosecution cannot relieve itself of its duty of
discharging its general burden of proving its case
beyond reasonable doubt."

15. In that case it was also observed: "Had it 
been established by evidence that the accused was in
his house at the material time, pointing a finger at
him as the probable assailant, then the Court could
have in deciding the matter considered his failure to
adduce explanation or the falsity of his explanation
along with other incriminating circumstances," 

16. In a wife-killing case, from its very 
nature, there could be no eye-witness of the 
occurrence, apart from the inmates of the house who 
may refuse to tell the truth. The neighbours may not
also come forward to depose. The prosecution is, 
therefore, necessarily to rely on circumstantial 
evidence. In a case of this nature, like any other case
of circumstantial evidence, one normally starts ‘
looking for the motive and the opportunity to
commit the crime. The prosecution case as to 
motive, the deceased's failure to bring home the
promised articles of dowry from her father has not 
been seriously challenged. PW 1 merely omitted to 
mention one of the promised articles in the FIR.

17. Where it is proved that the wife died of
assault in the house of her husband, there would be 
strong suspicion against the husband that at his 
hands the wife died. To make the husband liable, the 
minimum fact that must be brought on record, either 
by direct or circumstantial evidence, is that he was
in the house at the relevant time. 


18. In this case PW 1's. statement that the”
husband of the murdered wife was in his house on
the date of occurrence remains unchallenged. There is
nothing on record to show that the husband took any
step for alleviating his wife's alleged colic pain or to
inform his wife's relations after her alleged suicide.
PW 8, the uncle of the victim, stated that the 
husband was not at home when his wife's dead body
was taken away by the police. The husbands 
continued abscondence, from 20.3.82, the dale of
occurrence, till his surrender on 6.1.83, is by itself
not conclusive either of his guilt or guilty
conscience, but it lends weight to the circumstantial
evidence against him. 

19. In this case the prosecution has proved

            
            beyond any reasonable doubt that the victim was
brutally beaten and done to death by strangulation.
The defence plea that the victim committed suicide
was disbelieved by both the courts below. PW 4
Wazeda Khatun, a cousin of respondent No. 1, was
declared hostile. She however stated that Meher was
of robust health and she heard her sister-in-law
crying for stomach pain only on two occasions. The
assaults, causing ecchymossis all over the victim's
body, the neck, shoulder, upper part of the chest,
a ‘thighs, legs and hands and, then, hanging of the
body of a robust woman like Meher could not have
been done by one person. More than one person
conspired together to do that. Respondent 1, the
husband of the victim, cannot but be held as one of
the assailants.

20. The evidence shows that the accused,
having a strong enough motive, had the opportunity
‘of committing or conspiring to commit the crime.
The. established circumstances on the record,
considered along with the false explanation of the
accused, exclude the reasonable possibility of anyone
else being the real culprit. The chain of evidence
indicates unmistakably that within all human
probability the crime must have been committed by
the appellants. It is inconsistent with the innocence
of the appellants and incapable of any other
hypothesis than that of the appellants’ guilt.

In the result the appeal is allowed. During the
pendency of this matter respondent No. 2 "Rahmat
Ali died as disclosed in the respondent's application
dated 18.7.1990 and the appeal against him has thus
Division with regard to respondent No.1 are set
aside and the order of conviction of the trial court
under section 302 is altered to one under section 302
read with section 109 of the Penal Code and
respodent No. 1 is sentenced to imprisonment for
life. Respondent No. 1 is directed to surrender to his
bail bond. The trial court should report compliance
of this order to this Court.


SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Criminal)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Abdul Hai Sikder and
MH Rahman J, ATM 	    | another...... Appellants
Afzal J and Mustafa   |
Kamal J. 		    | Vs.
Judgment 		    | The State.............
August 1,1990.	    |.....Respondent*

Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 5

Demeanour of witness—The observation of the
demeanour of witness by the Trial Court is not
dismissed lightly by the Appellate Court, unless
there are intrinsic weaknessess and_ blatant
contradictions in his evidence.

Section 134

Number of witnesses—Conviction of the
appellants can safely be based on the solitary
evidence of the eye witness PW 1. His evidence is
full, complete and self-contained. It may not have
received corroboration from other witnesses, but it
stands fully corroborated by the circumstances of the
case and the medical evidence on record. Its fullness
and completeness are enough to justify the
conviction.    ...........(13 & 15)

Khandker Mahbub Hossain, Senior Advocate,
instructed by M Nowab Ali, Advocate- on-Record
— For the Appellants.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by Mvi. Md. Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent (State).

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: This appeal by special
leave by the 2 accused- -appellants is from the
judgment and order dated 29.6.86 passed by a
Division Bench of the High Court Division, Dhaka
in Criminal Appeal No. 47 of 1985 upholding the
order of conviction under sections 302/34 of the


*Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1988,
(From the judgment and order dated 29.6.86

passed by the High Court Division; Dhaka i in criminal
Appeal No. 47 of 1985),

            
            Penal Code and the order of sentence of
imprisonment for life passed thereunder and further
upholding the order of conviction under section 148
of the Penal Code but passing no separate scntence
thereunder and thereby altering the sentence of fine
with default order passed against them by the learned
Sessions Judge, Madaripur by his judgment and order
dated 15.1.85 in Sessions Case No. 49 of 1984.

2. The case against the accused-appellants and
others as narrated by the informant PW 1 Sona Mia
at the trial is that on 21.11.82 at about 5-30 PM he
and his deceased cousin Abdul Aziz found a cattle
belonging to accused Shamsuddin damaging their
kalai and paddy. The same cattle had earlier damaged
their harvest and accused Shamsuddin did not pay
heed to the salish that followed. Accordingly, they
seized the cattle and fastened it with a date tree in
their house. they were then fastening their own cattle
in their house when the accused-appellants with
others armed with dao, cheni, sharki, etc. came upon
their house. Appellant No. 1 Abdul Hye asked them
as to why they has seized and fastened their cow.
They replied that the cattle had eaten their harvest
and that it would be released after Madbars had seen
to it. Appellant No. 1 shouted, "Who is the Madbar,
catch the cattle and cut the shalas". Thereafter
appellant No. 1 Abdul Hye injured’ deceased Abdul
Aziz in the lower abdomen with a katra and appellant
No. 2 Motaleb struck Aziz with a sharki on his left
shoulder. Other accused persons beat the informant
and injured him. PW 3 Sharbat Kha, PW 5 Sekandar
Kha, Sekandar Bari, Jalu Madbar, Alauddin Madbar
and other people came to the place of occurrence on
hearing hue and cry. The accused persons fled away
towards the western side. Some of the witnesses saw
them running away. PW 1 narrated the occurrence to
them. Deceased Aziz was treated by a village quack
Swapan Dactar. Aziz breathed his last in the next
moming at 8/9-00 AM, PW 1 could not lodge the
First Information Report in the night as Aziz was
being treated and as the police station was at some
distance. He lodged the FIR in the following noon.
Daroga came to the PO and upon his identification
he held inquest upon the dead body and sent it to the
morgue. 10 local witnesses cited in the charge-sheet
are either away elsewhere not known or untraceable.

3. PW 7, SI Mostafizur Rahman, the IO of the
case, stated at the trial that during investigation he
seized alamats under two separate seizure lists Exts.
2 and 3, prepared sketch map Ext. 4 with Separate
Index Ext. 5. He examined witnesses and on
completion of investigation submitted charge-sheet
Altogether 10 accused persons were charged under
section 146 of the Penal Code and the 2 appellants
were charged under sections 148 and 302/34 of the
Penal Code.

4. The prosecution examined 7 Witnesses
although as many as 19 witnesses were Cited in the 
charge-sheet. 5 prosecution witnesses were official
witnesses. Out of 14 local witnesses only 4 
witnesses were examined by the prosecution of 
whom PWs 2, 3 and 5 were declared hostile. Pw 4
is the doctor who held post-mortem examination on
the dead body of the deceased Abdul Aziz. He found
one punctured wound 1” x 1/4” x 1/2” on the left
shoulder directed medially and one punctured wound 
1” x4,” x abdominal cavity on the right iliac region
Death, in his opinion, was due to shock and 
haemorrhage from the said injuries. The defence
examined none. Defence case as elicited from his
cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses is
that no occurrence took place in the house of the
informant. Deceased Aziz used to catch fish in the
river. along with other persons. He may have been
injured while catching fish. The occurrence did not
take place and in the manner alleged by the
prosecution. 

5. Eight other accused persons were convicted
and sentenced in the same trial under section 148 of 
the Penal Code by the Trial Court. They did not
appeal. Only the accused-appellants appealed and
upon dismissal of the same obtained leave in this
appeal from this Court.

6. Leave was granted to consider the
submission that the order of conviction was based 
on the solitary testimony of one witness i.e. PW 1
Sona Mia who, besides being a partisan witness
was not corroborated by any other witness although
the prosecution cited as many as 14 local witnesses
in the charge-shcet. Of the 3 other local witnesses
examined by the prosecution none supported the
prosecution case and all 3 of them were declared
hostile. It also fails to be considered whether this
was virtually a case of no evidence and whether at
any rate a conviction for such a grave offence could
be safely based upon such meagre evidence.

7. Mr. Khandker Mahbub Hossain, learned
Counsel for the accused-appellants, has taken us

            
            through the records of the case and the evidence of
pws. 
8. The submission that the FIR was lodged
belatedly without any explanation has not found
favour with the High Court. Division as PW 1 Sona
Miah has adequately explained the delay. On
non-examination of local witnesses cited in the
charge-sheet the High Court Division found that this
was also suitably explained by PW 1. There these
two submissions rest and Mr. Hossain did not carry
those any further.

9. As for PWs 2, 3 and 5 who have been
declared hostile it has been rightly found by the High
Court Division that they are not witnesses of truth.
Besides suppressing the truth they betrayed the
conduct of normal human beings by not inquiring as
to when, how, why and by whom deceased was done
to death when they allegedly saw the dead body in a
different place. Mr. Hossain could neither assail this
assessment of evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 5 by the
High Court Division nor could impress upon us as
to why any part of their evidence should be taken in
favour of the defence.

10. Mr. Hossain submits that PW 1 Sona
Miah made contradictory statements regarding the
place of occurrence. In cross-examination he stated
that his house and the house of deceased Aziz are
Separate but situated side by side, that the accused
persons went to the house of Aziz and that he went
to the house of Aziz on hearing hue and.cry. Mr.
Hossain submits that these statements are in stark
Contrast to his statement in the examination-in-chief
that he (PW 1) and deceased Aziz were fastening their
own cattle in their house when the appellants and
Others came upon their house variously armed. He’
Submits that the occurrence did not take place in the
Courtyard of PW 1 Sona Miah, as alleged, as Sona
Miah himself shifted the occurrence to the house of
deceased Aziz. :

11.  On- scrutiny this, submission has no legs
to stand PW 1 Sona Miah and deceased Aziz had
been living in adjoining huts but there is .no
evidence that their huts and cowsheds were separated
by a fence or wall. The sketch map shows a
common courtyard, separate huts and cowsheds.
PW1 referred constantly to the place of occurence as
"Our house", meaning thereby a common homestead,
although the residential huts and cowsheds are
seperate. The words "our house" have been used in
the FIR as well and the attention of PW 1 was not
drawn as to what he meant by the same.

12. The Trial Court at the end of the
deposition of PW 1 observed as follows :

"The way this witness was talking in the
witness box it appeared that he is a very simple
man" .

13. The observation of the demeanour of a
witness by the Trial Court is not dismissed lightly
by the appellate Court, unless there are some
intrinsic weaknesses and blatant contradictions in his
evidence. Mr. Hossain could not point out any
patent or latent weakness and any glaring or subtle
contradiction or omission in the evidence of PW 1.
His evidence remains unshaken by cross-
examination and it appears that the High Court
Division was well-founded in its finding that the
conviction of the appellants can safely be based on
the solitary evidence of the eye-witness PW 1.

14. Mr. Hossain submits that at any rate a
conviction for such a grave offence cannot be safely
based upon the meagre evidence of PW 1.

15. We do not think that PW 1 has provided
meagre evidence for the prosecution. His evidence is
full, complete and self-contained. It may not have
received corroboration from other. witnesses, but it
stands fully corroborated | by the circumstances of the
case and the medical evidence on record, If this
evidence is believed; and it has been rightly believed
by both the: Trial Court and the High Court
Division, its fullness and completeness are enough
to justify the conviction. =

We find no merit in this. appeal. Hence the
appeal is dismissed.

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,  	 | Zahura Khatun and
MH Rahman J, ATM	       | others......... Appellants
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J |
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
Judgment			 | Rokeya Khatun and
March 25, 1990. 	       | others.....Respondents*

Practice & Procedure

Reagitating a point—When leave was granted
with the tacit admission that the notice u/s. 106 of
the TP Act was defective the Court cannot in fairness
embark upon a fresh inquiry into the validity of such
notice. The landlord-appellants having abandoned that
point, they cannot be allowed to reagitate the same
in the absence of the respondent,

KS Hossain instructed by Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondents.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: This appeal by special
Ieave is from the judgment and order dated 11-9-85
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Civil
Revision No. 576 of 1984 discharging the judgment
and decree of dismissal of the suit passed by the
lower Appellate Court upon setting aside those of
the Trial Court.

2. Facts necessary for the disposal of the
appeal are that the predecessor-in-interest of the
present appellants instituted Title Suit No. 767 of
1981 in the 3rd Court of Munsif, Dhaka for eviction
of the predecessor-in-interest of the present
respondents on the allegations, inter alia, that he was
a monthly tenant in'respect of the suit premises in
accordance with Bengali Calendar month at the rate
of Tk. 75.00 per month. The tenant became a
defaulter and the tenancy was terminated by serving
a notice under section 106 of the Transfer of

*Civil Appeal No. 27 of 1986.

(From the Judgment and order dated 11-9-85
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka Bench in
Civil Revision No. 576 of 1984).


Property Act. The predecessor of the respondents
denied the relationship of landlord and tenant and
challenged the validity of the notice under Section
106 of the Transfer of Property Act.

3. The Trial Court decreed the suit on the
finding that there was a relationship of landlord and
tenant between the parties in respect of the demised
premises. Although the tenancy was operating in
terms of Bengali Calendar month the landlord issued
a notice under section 106 of the Transfer of
Property Act through his lawyer on 3.6.77 asking
the tenant to vacate the demised premises "after
30-6-77". The Trial Court held that no notice under
section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act Was
necessary if the tenant had proved himself to be a
defaulter. The Trial Court held the tenant to be a
defaulter. On appeal the Iearned Subordinate Judge,
1st Court, Dhaka by his judgment and decree dated
27-2-83 in Title Appeal No. 101 of 1983 found that
the notice Ext. 4 appeared to be defective on the face
of the record inasmuch as the tenancy in question
was not terminated with the expiry of the Bengali
month of tenancy. He held however that a notice
under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act
was not necessary when the tenant denied the title of
the landlord. The Appellate Court below dismissed
the suit on the ground that the plaintiff was required
to put in ad valorem Court fee on the valuation of
the demised premises, as her title was assailed by the
tenant. The plaintiff having not done so, the suit
was not maintainable.


4. In revision the High Court Division
reversed all the aforesaid findings and decisions of
the Appellate Court below, but with regard to the 
notice under section 106 of the Transfer of Property
Act it clearly noted that the learned Advocate for the
present appellant frankly submitted that the notice
was not a legal and valid notice. The High Court
Division held that in the absence of a valid 
termination of tenancy the landlord-plaintiff was not
entitled to a decree for eviction. The High Court
Division held that even in a case founded on
forfeiture notice was necessary. Although in its view
the Appellate Court below has committed error pof
law in the judgment in many respects the ultimate
order of dismissal of the suit was upheld by the
High. Court Division. :


5. Leave was granted to consider the question
whether the present defendant-respondents who were

            
            substitued during the pendency of the suit upon the
death of the original tenant are liable to be ejected
without any further notice, they being not recognised
as tenant by the landlord-appellants, on the ground
that the right of occupation of a monthly tenant is a
personal right which creates no interest in the land
and that this personal right which is not heritable
ceases with the death of either party. It falls to be
considered in this appeal whether in this situation
the suit for ejectment of the respondents, heirs of the
previous tenant, ought to have been decreed. Leave
was also granted to consider whether the defect in
this notice under section 106 of the Transfer of
Property Act, namely termination of tenancy not
coinciding with the end of a Bengali Calendar
month, is a mere irregularity which can be corrected
by extending the period of notice, if it is at all
necessary in the circumstances of the case.

6. Mr. Kazi Shahadat Hossain, learned
Counsel for the landlord-appellants, however, has
not pressed the first point on. which leave was
granted.

7. On the question of notice Mr. Kazi
Shahadat Hossain does not now argue that the defect
in the notice is a mere irregularity and that it can be
corrected by extending the period of notice if it is at
all necessary in the circumstances of the case. He
how argues that the notice was perfectly valid. A
notice under section 106 of the Transfer of Property
Act is to be construed liberally for the purpose of
Saving it and not for the purpose of destroying it, he
submits. If the tenant has understood the purport and
contents of the same and has suffered no prejudice
because of a slight inaccuracy in the period
Mentioned for expiry of the tenancy, the notice
Should not be taken exception to. In this case, the
Suit itself was filed several months after the end of
the Bengali Calendar month of tenancy, he further
Submits. :

8. We do not propose to go into the merit of
Mr. KS Hossain's submission. The plain fact is that
the lower Appellate Court held that the notice: was
not valid and in the High Court Division’ the
landlord-appellants gave up their.case that the notice,
Ext. 4 was valid. It was frankly submitted before the
the notice was not a legal and valid one. In both the
Courts. below-and in the High Court Division the
landlord-appellants submitted, in order that the suit
may survive, that no notice was necessary.-No leave |
was granted to the landlord-appellants on the
question as to whether the notice’ was valid or not.
On the contrary in the order granting leave it was
clearly stated that the learned Advocate for the
appellants contended that the defect in the notice was .
a mere irregularity which can be corrected by
extending the period of notice. In other words, there
is a defect in the notice. We do not think that it is
fit and proper to allow the landlord-appellants to reap
the benefit of an entirely different argument at this
stage when they gave up this point completely and
admitted the defect in their claim in all the Courts.
When the leave was granted with the tacit admission
that the notice was defective we cannot, in fairness,
embark upon a fresh inquiry into the validity of the
notice. The landlord-appellants having abandoned
that point cannot be allowed to reagitate the same in
the absence of the respondents.

9. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed but
without any order as to costs.

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Tobarak Ullah...:........
MH Rahman J, ATM 	       | ...... Plaintiff-Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | Vs.
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Rani Gupta @ Sree Sriti
				 | Rani Gupta @ Stiti Rani
Judgment 			 | Gupta and another........
March 15, 1990. 		 | Defendant-Respondents*

Specific Relief Act (I of 1877)
Sections 22 & 24

Solatium—Specific performance was refused on
the ground of hardship of the respondent. If solatium
is paid. only on consideration of the present market
value of the land in question then the purpose of
refusing specific performance on the ground of
hardship will be defeated. ,

We advised the parties to come to some understanding
as to the amount by which the solatium should be
increased, but they failed to arrive at any agreement. In
view of the facts and circumstances of the case, we think
that a solatium of taka 25,400.00 will be reasonable and
adequate in this case. This along with the earnest money of
taka 4,600.00, in all 30,000.00 taka, should be paid to the
appellant.

Khondkar Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior
Advocate, Mohammad Hannan, Advocates with him,
instructed by Mohammad Ayub, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Appellant.

MA Matin, Advocate instructed by Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 1.

Not represented — Respondent No. 2.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: The question
involved in this appeal by special leave is whether
the amount of solatium _ given to the

plaintiff-appellant is quite inadequate in the facts and
circumstances of the case.

*Civil Appeal No. 83 of 1989.

(From the judgment and order dated 29-5-1986
passed by the High Court Division, Sessions Bench,

Sylhet in Appeal from Appellate Decree No. 291 of
1979.)

2. Plaintiff instituted Title Suit No. 136 of
1970 in the Court of Munsif, Moulvibazar, for
specific performance of a contract for sale of a land
Under the said contract dated Sth Baishak, 1376 BS
(April 1969) defendant Benode Bihari Gupta agreed
to sell the suit land to the appellant for a
consideration of Tk. 5,100.00 out of which he
received in advance, Tk. 4,600.00 and promised to
execute a necessary kabala on receipt of the balance
and completing other formalities. He, however
failed to execute the necessary sale deed and
ultimately denied the contract whereupon the
appellant filed the suit on 14th April 1970 seeking
its specific performance, Defendant died thereafter
and his heir and widow (respondent in this appeal)
was substituted. She contested the suit by filing a
written statement denying the contract. The learned
Munsif on consideration of evidence led by both the
parties dismissed the suit. The appellant preferred an
appeal (Title Appeal No. 36 of 1977) before the
District Judge. It was heard by the Subordinate
Judge, who by his judgment dated 17th January 
1979, decreed the suit and ordered Specific
performance of the contract which was found to be
genuine. The judgment was challenged in Second
Appeal, being Second Appeal No. 291 of 1979,
before the High Court Division. The learned Single
Judge, by his judgment and decree dated 29-5-86,
maintained the findings of the first Appellate Cout
but refused specific performance of the contract in
exercise of his discretion under section 22 of the
Specific Relief Act and ordered refund of the earnest
money and a solatium of Tk. 5,400.00, in all Tk.
10,000.00, to.the plaintiff.

3. Khondkar Mahbubuddin Ahmed, learned '
counsel for the appellant, contends that the amount
of solatium is very inadequate, particularly when the
earnest money was paid in 1969 when value of Taka
was much higher than at present. Learned counsel
has produced certain sale deeds showing prices of
land sold very recently. The suit land measures 5.15
acres, out of which 3.20 acres is respondents
homestead. At the present rate, learned counsel
contends, the price of the suit land will be above 2
(two) lac taka. On the other hand; Mr. MA Matin,
learned counsel for the respondent, has produced a
kabala of the year 1969 which shows a much lower
price of land of the adjoining area:in that period.
Obviously, the price of land at that time was much
lower than that at the present time. However, It is


            not disputed that the earnest money of Taka
4,600.00 paid in 1969, would have increased by
about 10 times had it been deposited with any
commercial Bank. Mr. Matin also feels that the
solatium of Taka 5,400.00 at the present market
rate, is rather inadequate. On the other hand, specific
performance was refused on the ground of hardship of
the respondent, a widow of the Jate defendant, and if
solatium or compensation is paid only in
consideration of the present market value of the land,
then the purpose of refusing specific performance on
the ground of hardship will be defeated. We advised
"the parties to come to some understanding as to the
amount by which the solatium should be increased,
but they failed to arrive at any agreement. In view of
‘the facts and circumstances of the case, we think that
a solatium of Taka 25,400.00 will be reasonable and
adequate in this case. This along with the earnest
‘money of Taka 4,600.00, in all 30,000.00 Taka,
should be paid to the appellant.

4. In the result, the appeal is allowed without
any order as to costs; the amount of solatium is
‘increased to Taka 25,400.00 and the respondent is
‘directed to pay this along with the earnest money of
Taka 4,600.00, in all Taka 30,000.00 (thirty
‘thousand only), to the appellant within 2 (two)
months from date, failing which it will bear interest
'@ Tk. 15%. .
Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Quazi Nowab Faruque &
MH Rahman J, ATM 	       | another................
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | ....Defendant-Appellants
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
				 | Abdul Latif Bhuiyan &
Judgment 			 | others..........
March 27, 1990. 		 | ...........Plaintiff-Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. XXXIX rr. 1& 2

Ad-interim Injunction, propriety of—As the
plaintiff did not get any injunction from either of the
courts below and the application for revision was
moved after more than 3 months of the refusal of
injunction by the court of appeal below, the
granting of ad-interim injunction ex parte at the time
of issuing the Rule could not be said to be a proper
exercise of discretion. Rather it should be considered
an unusual order in the facts of the case.   ......(7)

Khandker Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior
Advocate, instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellants.

Mad. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent Nos. 1 to 6.

Not represented — Respondent Nos. 7-8.

Judgment

ATM Afzal J: This appeal by leave arises
out of a temporary interim order passed by a Single
Judge of the High Court Division in revision which
has already run out its time.

2. Plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1-6 instituted
Other Suit No. 71 of 1987 in the Sth Court of
Assistant Judge, Chittagong on 8-8-87 for
permanent injunction impleading the appellants as
defendant Nos. 1 and 2 (defendant-appellant No. 2
has since died and been substituted by her heirs).

3. The plaintiffs also prayed for temporary
injunction restraining the appellants from disturbing

*Civil Appeal No. 63 of 1989.

(From the Judgment and Order dated 2nd April,
1989 passed by the High Court Division, Chittagong ~
Bench in Civil Revision No. 89 of 1989.)

            
            in any manner the enjoyment of suit property by
them. The appellants contested the prayer for
temporary injunction by filing a written objection.

4. The learned Assistant Judge by order dated
19-1-88 rejected the prayer for temporary injunction
holding, inter alia, that the plaintiffs miserably failed
to establish a prima facie case. On appeal by the
plaintiffs against the said order the learned
Subordinate Judge and Commercial Judge, 2nd
Court, Chittagong by order dated 19-12-88 dismissed
the same and affirmed the order of the learned
Assistant Judge holding, inter alia, that the plaintiffs
have no arguable case and have no title at present and
that the balance of convenience and inconvenience is
in favour of the defendants.

5. Plaintiffs took a revision against the
appellate order and a learned Single Judge of the
High Court Division, Chittagong by order dated 2nd
April, 1989 issued a rule upon the appellants in
Civil Revision No. 89 of 1989 and by the same
order restrained the defendants by injunction from
disturbing the possession of the plaintiffs in the suit
land in any manner for 10 weeks pending disposal of
the rule.

6. Appellants obtained Ieave to appeal from
the aforesaid ad-interim order of injunction on 2nd
May, 1989, the operation of which was stayed for 2
months initially and then extended from time to
time. Leave was granted to consider whether the
impugned order was passed in exercise of a proper
and just discretion in the facts of the case and ex
parte at the time of issuing the rule.

7. As already noticed the impugned injunction
order which was for a period of 10 weeks only has
already ceased to exist. The revision case, we are
told, is, however, still pending. It is not advisable,
therefore, to make any elaborate comment on the
issue as to injunction. It, however, falls to be said
on the submission of Mr. Mahbubuddin Ahmed,
Iearned advocate for the appellants, that inasmuch as
the plaintiffs did not get any order of injunction from
either of the Courts below and had been without any
such order of injunction since the filing of the suit
in August 1987 and further the application for
revision was moved after more than 3 months of the
refusal of the prayer of injunction by the Court of
appeal below, the granting of the ad-interim
injunction ex parte at the time of issuing the rule
could not be said to be a proper exercise of
discretion. Rather it should he Considered to be
unusual order in the facts and Circumstances of the
case. Being of such view the operation of the said
order was stayed and now that the order itself has
expired, it is not necessary to say anything 8
except that the plaintiffs, if advised, May take steps
for an carly hearing of the revision case wherein their
prayer for injunction will be considered on merit.

In the result, the appeal is disposed of with
observation as above without any order as to cost.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Zakir Hossain and others
MH Rahman J, ATM      | ........ Accused Appellant
Afzal J and Mustafa   |
Kamal J. 		    | Vs.
Judgment 		    | The State and another.........
March 12, 1990.

Practice & Procedure

Examining a new question—Apart from the —
question on which leave was granted, counsel for the appellant submitted that the allegations made in the
FIR do not constitute any offence as alleged. Court
did not like to examine this question while hearing 
the appeal.     ........(5)

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898) |
Sections 195(I)(c), 344 & 561A

Stay of proceeding—In the facts of the case as
in point of time the civil suit was instituted before
the filing of the FIR and the questioned documents
in their originals are yet to be produced and
examined by the civil court. The criminal proceeding” where the documents are claimed as forged, may in
the interest of justice, be stayed till the disposal of
the civil suit. (6)



Rafiqur Rahman, Sr. Advocate, instructed by
Serajur Rahman, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

*Criminal Appeal No. 17 of 1989.

(From the judgment and order dated 3
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka In
Revision No. 281 of 1988)

            
            B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record -
For the Respodent No. 1

TH Khan Sr. Advocate, instructed by NH
Khandker, Advocate-on-Record - For the Respodent No. 2.

Judgment

MH Rahman J: The appellants were
accused in District Anti-Corruption Case No. 122 of
1987 under sections 420/467/468/471/109 of &he
Penal Code, now pending in the Court of Additional
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka. They
unsuccessfully moved the High Court Division,
Dhaka under section 561A of the Code of Criminal
procedure for quashing that proceeding.

2. On 26-4-87 respondent No. 2 along with
aix others lodged an FIR before the Demra Police
station alleging, inter alia, that they purchased 1.07
areas of land by 7 registered deeds from appellant
Nos. 8-11 between 14 th February, 1983 and 24th
June, 1984. Appellant No. 8 Haripada Mandal, a
minor, was represented by his natural guardian,
mother Falani Bala. Subsequently on 2-12-1986
appellant Nos. 1 and 2, in collusion with other
appellants, obtained two registered sale deeds from
appellant Nos. 8-11 in respect of some lands out of
the aforesaid 1.07 acres of land on the basis of two
false agreements to sale, ante-dated as on 24-1-1981.

3. The appellants’ case is that before filing of
the aforesaid FIR appellant Nos. 1 and 2 instituted
Title Suit No. 159 of 1987 og 8.4.87 in the First
Court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka impleading
respondent No. 2 as the principal-defendant and
appellant Nos. 8 to 11 as proforma-defendants for
declaration of title to the suit land measuring '765
acre and also for further declaration that the kabalas
of the principal-defendant and others were not
binding upon them. In that case the plaintiffs, as
required under the law, filed in court along with their
Plaint the copies of their kabalas. Respondent No. 2
appeared in that suit and filed written statement
alleging that the kabalas of the plaintiffs were
fraudulent.

4. leave was granted for considering a
contention that the High Court Division overlooked
an important aspect of the case that the documents question having already been produced by the
appellants in the Civil Court, the jurisdiction of the
Criminal Court was barred under section 195(1)(c) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure to take cognizance
of alleged offences except on the complaint in
writing of that Civil Court. The State and the
informant contested the appeal on common grounds.
It is contended that the land and the parties of the
Civil Suit and those of the criminal proceeding are
not identical, and that as a prima facie case has been |
made out in the charge-sheet and PW 1 has already
been examined the instant criminal proceeding is not
liable to be quashed. It is urged that as the appellants
committed the offences long before the malafide
institution of the Civil Suit and the disputed
fraudulent kabalas in their originals have not yet
been filed in Court, the provision of section 195(1)
(c) of the Code is not attracted in this case.

5. Apart from the question on which the leave
was granted, Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, the learned
Counsel for the appellant, has also submitted that
the allegations made in the FIR do not constitute
any offence under sections 467 and 420 of the Penal
Code. At this stage we do not like to examine this
question.

6. In the facts of this case as in point of time
the civil suit was instituted before the filing of the
FIR and the questioned documents in their originals
are yet to be produced and examined by the Civil
Court the criminal proceeding where those very —
documents are claimed by the informants as forged,
may, in the interest of justice, be stayed till the
disposal of the civil suit.

7. In the result, the appeal is disposed of. The
criminal proceeding arising out of District
Anti-Corruption Case No. 122/87 and Demra PS
Case No. 42(4)/87 now pending in the Court of
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka is
stayed till the disposal of Title Suit No. 159 of
1987 of the First Court of Subordinate Judge,
Dhaka.

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Criminal)
Kemaluddin Hossain CJ, Fazle | Bangladesh...........
Munim J, Ruhul Islam J,.     | ............ Petitioner
Badrul Haider Chowdhury J    | Vs.
and Shahabuddin Ahmed J..    | Mohammed Ali and
Judgment 			     | 6 others....... ...
November 24,1980. 	     | ........... Respondents*

Martial Law Regulation No. 1 of 1975
Reg. No. 4(4)

Power of conversion—The fundamental question
is whether the Government's power of review
includes the power to convert an acquittal into
conviction. Unless such power is specifically
provided in the statute the same cannot be read into
it and exercised.

It may be mentioned here that before the provision for
review was brought into this statute by amendment there
was provision for appeal against an order of sentence of a
martial law court and the appellate power specifically
included the power of enhancement of sentence. Even then
the appellate power did not include the power of converting
acquittal into conviction. Be that as it may, in the absence
of any specific provision for converting acquittal into
conviction, the Government exercised jurisdiction which
was not vested in it and the impugned order of conviction
is void.

Abdus Sobhan, Additional Attorney-General,
with Matiur Rahman, Assistant Attorney-General,
instructed by MR Khan, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Petitioner. ° :

Respondents—Not represented.

Judgement

Shahabuddin Ahmed J: In this petition
Government of Bangladesh seeks special leave to
appeal for an order of the High Court Division dated
30-7-80 passed in Writ Petition No. 1050 of 1978
setting aside an order by which. the Government
converted ‘acquittal into conviction of the
accused-respondents in exercise of powers of review

* Criminal Petition for Special Leave to Appeal
No. 56 of 1980. °

(From the judgment and Order dated the 30th
July, 1980 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No. 1050 of 1978.)


conferred upon it by Regulation No. 4(4) of Martial
Law Regulation No. I of 1975.

2. Respondents were tried by Special Martial
Law Court No. IV at Jessore on a charge under
section 396 of the Penal Code; they were acquitted
of the charge by an order dated 16-8-77, Proceedings
of the case were submitted to the Government for
review as required under the provisions of
Regulation No. 4(2) of Martial Law Regulation No.
1 of 1975. The. Government by Memo No. 536-1
IV/Con-170/78 dated 27.9.78 of the Ministry of
Law (Justice Division) informed the Special Martial
Law Court that, on review, the order of acquittal
was set aside and the accused persons were convicted
under section 396 of the Penal Code and that two of
them were sentenced jo transportation for life and.
the other four were sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for ten years. The respondents
challenged the legality of this order of the.
Government in the Writ Petition on the ground that
at the relevant time power of review vested in the
Chief Martial Law Administrator and not in the
Government. The High Court Division found that
by Martial Law (23rd Amendment) Regulation,
1976 (Regulation No. XXXIII of 1976) power of
review of the proceeding of cases tried by Special
Martial Law Courts were transferred from the 
Government to the Chief Martial Law Administrator
and as such the impugned order of review by the
Government was a nullity and on that finding the
High Court Division declared ‘the conviction a 
nullity and set it aside.

3. Mr. Abdus Sobhan, the learned Additional
Attorney-General, has produced before us the 
subsequent amendment, namely (24th Amendment)
Regulation III of 1977 by which power of review
was re-transferred to the Government with effect
from June 6, 1977 and consequently, he has 
submitted, the Government had jurisdiction to 
review the proceedings of this case. On perusal of 
the amendment in Regulation No. 4(4) it is found 
that at the relevant time the Government had 
jurisdiction to review the proceedings of the case a
against the respondents and the High Court Division
failed to notice this vital change of law.

4. But the fundamental question is, whether
the Government's power of review under Regulation
No. 4(4).includes the power to convert an acquitial
into conviction. The Regulation is quoted below :


            
            Reg. 4(4). The Government may, on
review, set aside, vary or modify any order,
judgment or sentence Or make orders for retrial
or such other orders as he deems necessary for
the ends of justice”.

5. The learned Additional Attorney-General has
tried to argue that the power to 'vary' includes the
power to convert acquittal into conviction. We are
unable to accept this argument and read into this
Regulation the power of conversion of acquittal into
conviction. Unless the power of conversion of
acquittal into conviction is specifically provided in a
statute such power cannot be read into it and
exercised. It may be mentioned here that before the
provision for review was brought into this statute by
amendment there was provision for appeal against an
order of sentence of a Martial Law Court and the
appellate power specifically included the power of
enhancement of sentence. Even then the appellate
power did not include the power of converting
acquittal into conviction. Be that as it may, in the
absence of any specific provision for converting
acquittal into conviction, the Government exercised
jurisdiction which was not vested in it and the
impugned order of conviction is void. It is, therefore,
not necessary to interfere with the order of the High
Court Division setting aside the conviction though
on a different ground.

6. In the result, the petition is dismissed.
Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)

(Civil)
MH Rahman J,        | Bangladesh Inland Water
Mustafa Kamal J and | Transport Corporation and
Latifur Rahman J.   | others............. Appellants
			  | Vs.
Judgment 		  | Nazma Flour Mills Lid. &
January 30,1991.    | others........... Respondents*

Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 73

Comparison of signature—when direction for
comparison is not called for—the case is one for
eviction and not for determination of title between
the competing parties. Profulla Chandra who is
sought to be summoned for his specimen signature
was not present before the Court either as a witness
or in any other capacity. In the facts of the case the
question of directing him to give his specimen
signature does not arise. = - sven (11)

Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, Senior Advocate,
instructed by Serajur Rahman Advocate-on-Record
— For the Appellants.

SR Pal, Sr. Advocate, instructed by Shamsul
Huq Siddique, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondents. ,

Judgment

MH Rahman J: Respondents filed Title Suit
No. 38 of 1989 in the Court of Subordinate Judge,
Narayanganj for evicting defendant No. 1, the
Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Corporation and
its functionaries for recovery of arrear rents, and for
compensation for unauthorized occupation.

2. The Corporation was a tenant in the suit
premises, admittedly owned by Profulla Chandra
Roy Chowdhury and others under a written contract.
In between 1.9.1986 to 11.4.1987 the owners
transferred the suit premises to the plaintiff-
respondents by 31 registered kabalas for valuable
consideration. By separate registered notices of
attornment dated 22.9.1986 they informed the

*Civil Appeal No. 63 of 1990.
(From the judgment and order dated 18 June,
1990 passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in

Civil Order No. 1156 of 1990).

            
            Corporation about the transfer of the suit premises,
The plaintiffs also issued a similar notice of
attornment on 30.7.1987, Defendant No, 1 received
that notice on 10.10.1987. On the defendants’ request
the plaintiffs gave information about the Bank
account numbers of the owners, and sent photo
copies of the sale-deeds to the Corporation. Instead
of paying rents to the plaintiffs the Corporation
requested them to sell the suit land by its Ietter dated
4.11.1987. When the Corporation again requested
the plaitiffs to sell the suit land at actual cost price
the plaitiffs rejected that offer by their Ietter dated
25.11.1987. Defendant No. 1 thereafter with
malafide intention requested the concerned Ministry
for acquisition of the suit premises, but its proposal
was finally turned down. As the plaintiffs required
the suit premises for their own use and occupation,
and for reconstruction and rebuilding, and defendant
No. 1 failed to pay rents the plaintiffs served notice
under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act and
determined the tenancy with the expiry of
31.12.1987. Defendant No. 1 did not vacate the suit
premises and hence the suit.

3. The case of defendant No. 1 is that it took
Iease of the suit premises in 1916 and continued to
remain there as tenant upto 1972; that defendant No.
1 in good faith recognized the plaintiffs as landlords
and offered to purchase the suit premises from them,
but subsequently after examining the plaintiffs’
kabalas and obtaining other information came to
learn that their documents were forged one, and that
they did not acquire any valid title.

4. The defendants’ application for examining the
signature and thumb impression of the executants of
the plaintiffs’ kabalas by an expert was rejected by the
trial Court on 1.11.89 by observing that there was no
good reason for sending the documents for expert
examination before the taking of evidence. After
recording of evidence the defendants renewed their
prayer for examination of the documents by an expert
by filing an application on 2.6.90, That application
was also rejected. On the appellants’ revisional
application the High Court Division directed the trial
Court to compare and examine itself the
thumb-impression of the executant, Profulla Chandra
Roy Chowdhury, in the documents of both the sides
and come to its own conclusion. .

5. The defendant-appellants contend that the
High Court Division acted illegally in giving the
impugned direction instead of directing examination
of the thumb impression of the alleged executant in
the impugned documents by an expert which would
be more in keeping with the interest of justice
having regard to the high value attached to the
opinion of a thumb-impression expert.

6. It is further contended that the High Court
Division failed to consider the other prayer of the
appellants in respect of expert examination of the
signatures of Profulla Chandra Roy Chowdhury in
Bengali after summoning him to the Court for the
purpose of obtaining his specimen signature for
comparison. It is submitted that the direction for
visual examination of the thumb-impression, as
against scientific examination by an expert cannot
produce the necessary degree of accuracy for a firm
opinion and as such the more reliable of the methods
for determining the genuineness of a thumb
impression, namely expert examination, ought to
have been allowed by the High Court Division.

7. On behalf of the respondents it is contended
that in view of the facts that the defendants accepted
the plaintiffs as their landlords by their letter dated
12.10.1987 and 26.10.1987 (Exts. 13 and 15) and
subsequently proposed to purchase the suit premises
from them by their Ietter dated 4.11.1987 (Ext. 17)
they cannot now legally turn round and assail the
title of the plaintiffs in the instant suit for eviction
and recovery of arrear rents, and the High Court
Division rightly refused to refer the matter for an
expert examination.

8. It is further contended that the appellants
could not submit in the trial Court any admitted 
signature or thumb impression of Profulla Chandra
Roy Chowdhury for comparison.

9. The trial Court rejected the appellants
application on 2.6.1990 on the following reasons
that the signatures in the plaintiffs’ purchase deeds
are in Bengali but in the defendants’ documents the
signature of Profulla Chandra Roy Chowdhury was
written in English; that the plaintiffs asserted that
both the signature and the thumb impression in the
defendants’ document were not of Profulla Chandra
and that the defendants did not produce any other 
document showing specimen signature or thumb
impression of Profulla Chandra.


10. Before the Trial Court there was no
admitted signature or thumb impression of Profulla


            
            Chandra for comparing the thumb impression or
 signature in the deed in question. In that view of the
matter The High Court Division has rather
unnecessarily directed the trial Court to compare
and
examine: the thumb impression of the executant,
profulla Chandra, in the documents of the parties.

11. On behalf of the appellants it is contended
that in the interest of justice Profulla Chandra ought
to have been summoned by the trial Court to give
his specimen signature in Bengali and also thumb
impression n. This is a case for eviction and not one
for determination of title between the two competing
parties. Profulla Chandra was not present before the
court either as 2 witness or in any other capacity. In
the facts of the case the question of directing him to
give his specimen signature in Bengali does not arise
under section 73 of the Evidence Act.

We find no substance in this appeal and it is,
accordingly, dismissed. No costs.

Ed.
SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
| (Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed   | Golam Kader being dead his
CJ, MH Rahman J,    | heirs; Nurun Nahar Begum
Mustafa Kamal J and | and others........
Latifur Rahman J.   | Added-Defendant-Appellants
			  | Vs.
Judgment 		  | Abdul Khaleque Choukder
August 13, 1990.    | and Others..........
			  | .....Plaintiff-Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. I r. 10

Addition of party in a suit for specific
permance of contract—the appellants' averments
in the application for addition of party setting up an
independent title to the land disentitle them. to be
included as parties within the framework of the
present suit wherein the real question to be
determined is Wherein the real question to be
the parties the whether the contract for sale between
the therein was genuine and whether on the
basis of the plaintiffs are entitled to get a decree.


*Civil Appeal No. 120 of 1984
Passage the Judgment and order dated 19.1.1984
Comitlaj y the High Court Division Comilla’ Bench,
Civil Revision No. 329 of 1983).

The averments for addition of party will convert the
present suit into one for determination of title which
is not permissible in law. vevee(8)

B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

MG Rabbani, Senior Advocate, instructed by
Shamsul Hug Siddique, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2.

Ex parte— Respondent Nos. 3(a) to 3(d), 4 and 5,

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: This appeal by: special
leave at the instance of the added defendants is
directed against the judgment and order passed by a
Single Judge of the High Court Division, Comilla
Bench in Civil Revision No. 329 of 1983 setting
aside the order of the Munsif, Chandpur in Tide Suit
No. 262 of 1973 arising out of an application under
Order 1 rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

2. The plaintiffs-respondents filed a suit for
specific performance of contract against the
Respondent Nos. 3(a)-3(d) as principal defendant
Nos. 1-4. Respondent No. 4 was made proforma
defendant No. 5 in the suit. The present appellants
filed an application on 9.5.83 under Order 1 rule 10
of the Code of Civil Procedure stating, inter alia,
that they are plaintiffs in Title Suit No. 7 of 1969,
that the plaintiffs of the present suit for specific
performance of contract created a collusive document
in order to grab the property of Title Suit No. 7 of
1969. In the said application the appellants stated
that they are necessary parties in the present suit and
as such they should be added as defendants in the suit
for the ends of justice.

3. The plaintiffs opposed the application for
addition of party contending that the appellants are
not necessary parties in the present suit.

4. The learned Munsif allowed the application
for addition of party and in revision the learned
Single Judge of the High Court Division set aside
the order and disallowed the application for addition
of parties. .

5. Leave was granted to consider whether the
High Court Division committed any error in
reversing the decision of the trial Court by holding
that the appellants are not necessary parties and
consequently disallowing the application for addition

            
            of party under Order 1 rule 10 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.

6. Mr. B Hossain, learned Advocate appcaring
for the added defendants, submits that the High Court
Division acted illegally in sctting aside the
application for addition of partics in the facts of the
present case.

7. The suit as filed by the plaintiffs is a suit
for specific performance of contract wherein the real
question to be determined is whether the contract for
sale between the parties was a genuine one and
whether on the basis of that the plaintiffs are entitled
to gcta decree.

8. From the application for addition of party it
appcars that the present appellants arc claiming by
their alleged purchase a small fraction of the total
land involved in the present suit. Their Title Suit
No. 7 of 1969 involves a small fraction of the
present suit land. The Icarned Single Judge of the
High Court Division found that appellant Nos. 1 and
2 have not made any specific averments to the effect
that they are directly interested in any manncr in the
suit land. The present appellants are not claiming
through the defendants of the present suit. They have
set up an independent title of their own. Their
averments in the application for addition of party
disentitle them to be included within the framework
of the present suit. That will convert the present suit
for specific performance of contract into a suit for
determination of title which is not permissible in
law. The learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division rightly found that the present appellants are
not necessary parties for complete and effectual
adjudication of the issues involved in the present
Suit. The learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division has also observed in his judgment that the
appellants may file an application for analogous
hearing of Title Suit No. 7 of 1969 with the present
Suit, if they so desire. Consequently, this appeal is
dismissed without any order as to costs.

Ed.


SUPREME COURT 
(Appellate Division)
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,  | Karimunnessa Begum
MH Rahman J, ATM’      | Chowdhurani and.......
Afzal J and Latifur    | others..........., Appellants
Rahman J.		     | Vs.
Judgment 		     | Niranjan Chowdhury &

November 1, 1990. __! another...... Respondents

a cquisition and Tenanc
T5380 (xX WI of 1951) Y Act,
Section 96
Partial pre-emption—Five holdings were
transferred by a single Kabala. The Petitioner
deposited consideration money for four holdings
seeking pre-emption thereof. There was no difficulty
in allowing him pre-emption of four holdings as pre-
emption is holding-wise. Such pre-emption is not hit
by the doctrine of partial pre-emption, ...(10)

Miah Abdul Gafur, Advocate-on-Record
Supreme Court — For the Appellants.
SS Halder, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court,
instructed by Ranesh Chandra Maitra, Advocate-on-

Ex-parte — Respondent No. 2.

Judgement

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: In this appeal by
special Ieave the question is whether the doctrine’
barring partial pre-emption stands in the way of the
respondent-pre-cmptor's way of getting pre-emption
of four out of. five holdings, transferred under the
same kabala although he is a co-sharer in all the five
holdings and as such is entitled to pre-empt them all

2. This arises from Misc. Case No. 159 of
1965 in the 2nd Court of Munsif, Satkania. It wa
filed by the pre-emptor-respondent claiming Pre-
emption of 4 out of 5 schedules of land transferred to
the appellants under a registered kabala dated 30
September 1965 by his co-sharer, respondent No. 2
Objection was raised by the pre-emptces (appellants)’
on the ground that one of the lands, namely schedule
III, was not sought to be pre-empted and as such

*Civil Appeal No. 23 of 1986. 

(From the judgment and order dated 1.4.84
passed by the High Court Division, Chittagong
Bench, in Civil Revision No. 332 (R) of 1982).

            
            application for pre-emption was hit by the rule as to
bar of partial pre-emption. Pre-emptor first claimed
that Schedule-III land was entirely his own and the
Vendor had no title and interest therein, and as such,
he was not required to pre-empt his own land. This
claim of the pre-emptor was accepted by the Trial
court and the pre-emption prayed for in respect of
the 4 schedules of land was allowed. The appellate
Court, however, disagreed with the finding that the
pre-emptee's vendor had no title in the schedule-III
land but found that both the Vendor and the
pre-emptor were co-sharers in Schedule-III land and
As this land was omitted in the application for
pre-emption, the pre-emptor's application for
pre-emption was hit by the rule as to bar of partial
reversed the trial Court's decision and dismissed the
application for pre-emption,

3. Pre-emptor challenged this decision in
revision—CR No. 339 of 1983. In revision the
pre-emptor did not challenge the appellate Court's
finding that both he and the vendor were co-sharers
in Schedule-III land, but accepted this finding as
correct. He, however, took a new ground to justify
the claim of pre-emption, and the learned Single
Judge accepted the new ground. The learned Single
Judge found that the land of each Schedules
comprised a separate khatian and that each khatian
constituted a separate holding, and that considcration
for each of these holdings was separately shown in
the kabala by which all of them were transferred. The
consideration for schedule-III land was stated to be
Tk. 400.00 and that of the other 4 Schedule lands
Was stated to be Tk. 200.00 each; the pre-emptor had
deposited Tk. 800.00 representing the consideration
for these. four holdings he sought to pre-empt. On
this finding the learned Single Judge, by an order
dated 1 April 1984, read with the previous order dated
4 May 1981, reversed the appellate Court's decision
and restored that of the Trial Court allowing
pre-emption of four of the holdings. The learned
single judge while giving this decision observed
that pre-emption under section 96 of the State
Acquisition and Tenancy Act is to be allowed
holding wise and that so long no holding is disturbed
or split up by pre-emption, it will not be a case of
partial pre-emption,

4. Mr. Miah Abdul Gafur, learned Advocate for:
the appellants, has seriously assailed the view taken
by the Iearned Single Judge and has contended that
when five holdings were transferred under a single
kabala and when in each of the holdings the
pre-emptor was a co-sharer, he must pre-empt all the
holdings or none at all, for he cannot be permitted to
pick and choose the holdings according to his own
convenience. Learned Advocate further contends that
the pre-emptor is also required to deposit the entire
amount of the consideration money, as stated in the
kabala, at the time of filing the application for
pre-emption. Learned Advocate has sought reliance
for this contention from "Salimuddin Mondal Vs.
Mohitosh Biswas, 14 DLR 796, Babu Huq Vs.
Laljan, 8 DLR 362 (same case as reported in 10
DLR, 54) and Makhan Lal Vs. Reazuddin Sepai 13
DLR 323. Mr. SS Halder, Icarned Advocate for the
respondent has, on the other hand, relied upon a
number of decisions including the decision in the -
case of Diam Hossain Vs. Haran Das, 13 DLR, 283,
to substantiate his contention that pre-emption is to
be sought "holding-wise" and not transaction-wisc or
kabala-wise and that so long no holding transferred
is disturbed or split up by pre-emption, the question
of partial pre-emption docs not arise. He has
contended that a holding may consist of several plots
and a person seeking pre-emption is not permitted to
pick and choose one or some of the plots of a
holding and leave out other plots of the same
holding, and this is what is prevented by the "rule as
to bar of partial pre-emption". In this case, learncd
Advocate has pointed out, pre-emption of 4 holdings
out of 5 will not result in splitting up any of the
holdings including the holding Ieft out.

5. The ‘doctrine’ as to partial pre-emption or
‘rule’ barring pre-emption in part has not been laid
down in any statute. In particular, section 96 of the
State Acquisition and Tenancy Act under which
pre-emption has been sought in this case, does not
speak of any such term. This section provides for
pre-emption of "a portion or a share of a holding" on
deposit of the entire consideration or value of the
land transferred. The ‘doctrine' of partial pre-emption
has been evolved through interpretation, by courts,
of the law relating to pre-emption keeping in vicw
the object of pre-emption, i.e., convenience or
inconvenience of parties involved. Section 96 has
given right to pre-emption and also has laid down
the procedure for seeking pre-emption. Right to
pre-emption has béen given to co-sharers in a
holding and also to a person having land contiguous

            
            to the land transferred. Priority of the right, among
persons seeking pre-emption, has also been laid
down therein. In the case of Salimuddin (/4 DLR
796), which was decided by a Single Bench, several
holdings were sold by one sale deed as a single
transaction: a co-sharer in the holdings transferred
sought to pre-empt some of the holdings Ieaving out
others. It was disallowed by the Iearned Single Bench
on two grounds, one was that the consideration
money which was paid in a lump for all the holdings
together cannot be split up for the purpose of deposit
at the time of filing of the application; and the other
was that the "single transaction" covering all the
holdings cannot be split up by pick and choose to
suit the pre-emptor's purpose causing inconvenience
to the purchaser. It appears that the Iearned Single
Judge referred to section 14(2) of the Bengal General
Clauses Act, 1899 and observed that the word
‘holding’ appearing in the statute, namely section 26
(F) BT Act, though singular, includes its plural also
i.e. a ‘holding’ may be read as "holdings" as well.
Emphasis is found to have been given on the fact
that all the holdings sold together under a kabala
‘constituted a ‘single transaction’ But the section did
not speak of any ‘transaction’ or of "any single
_ portion” or "instrument"; the section speaks of "a
portion or a share of a holding". In Diam Hossain's
case (13 DLR 283), decided under the same ‘statute,
26(F) BT Act, another Single Bench took a different
view and held that though a holding cannot be split
up for the purpose of pre-emption, such as, by
allowing pre-emption of one plot out of several
plots comprising the same holding, but when two or
more holdings are involved, a co-sharer is at liberty
to seek pre-emption of one of the holding Ieaving
out others. In that case two holdings were sold under
a kabala, one for a consideration of Tk. 600.00 and
the other for a consideration of Tk. 400.00 and
pre-emption for one of the two holdings was sought
for upon deposit of the consideration for that holding
only. That pre-emption was allowed in view of the
provision in section 26(F) BT Act that "a portion or
a share of a holding" if transferred, could be
pre-empted.
6. In Mosammat Asimon Nessa Vs. Md. Akbar
Ali Sheikh and others, 19 DLR 659, a Division
Bench of the High Court considered this very
question in view of the conflicting decisions in the
cases of Diam Hossain (/3 DLR) and Solimuddin (14
DLR). The learned Judges held that the "right of
pre-emption given to a co-sharer under Section 26(F)
BT Act, as well as section 96, State Acquisition and
Tenancy Act, "is with reference to a holding", that is
so say, the right accrues "holding-wise", In that case
three holdings were transferred under one kabala but a
co-sharer tenant prayed for pre-emption of two Of the
three holdings leaving out the 3rd one; plea of bar as
to partial pre-emption was raised but it was ejected
on the ground that none of the holdings transferred
would be split up or disturbed by the pre-emption
sought, The view taken in the 14 DLR case was
dissented from and that taken in /3 DLR case Was
relied upon.

7. Mr Gafur has tried to make out some
distinction between the facts of this case (19 DLR)
and those of the instant one. In the 19 DER case the
pre-emptor was found to be a co-sharer of two of the 
three holdings transferred and he wanted to pre-empt
those two holdings Ieaving out the 3rd one it was
not stated any where whether he was co-sharer in
that holdings also. If he were not a co-sharer in the
left-out holding, the question of its pre-emption
would not arise and the pre-emptor's prayer for
pre-emption of the two holdings, in which he was a
co-sharer, would not come under the doctrine of
partial pre-emption. It is true that it was not clear
whether the pre-emptor was a co-sharer in the
left-out holding; nevertheless, the interpretation of
seelion 26(F) corresponding to section 96 as given
by the Division Bench is of crucial importance; and
according to this interpretation pre-emption is
“holding wise" i.e. by pre-emption a holding cannot
be split up; it is to be kept in tact and pre-empted:
no part of it is to be left-out. This however does not
mean that if several holdings are transferred by a|
kabala all of them are to be pre-empted. The
expression ‘holding’ in singular according to the
General Clauses Act need not include its plural
'holdings' for the purpose of pre-emption in the
absence of any specific: provision to that effect. Thí
view as to holding wise pre-emption was followed
in a number of subsequent cases including
Tamizuddin Vs, Guljan Bibi, 26 DLR P 93. and one
unreported case, Birendra Nath Vs. Subal Chandra—
Civil Revision No. 72 of 1978.

8. Mr. Abdul Gafur contends that a pe
seeking pre-emption must deposit the entire
consideration money and if the consideration for
several holdings sold by a single kabala was paid in

            
            lamp, the entire consideration money must be
deposited; otherwise pre-emption for some of the
holdings out of several holdings would fail. He
sought reliance on this point from the case of Babu
Huq Vs. Laljan Babi 8 DLR 362. In that case the
pre-emptor had 7/15 share in a holding and the
remaining share, 8/15, belonged to her brother; but
her brother, who was possessing the entire holding,
sold it to a stranger under a kabala for a consideration
of Tk. 600/-. She sought pre-emption of the share of
her brother and deposited the proportionate share of
the consideration plus compensation i,e. she
deposited Tk. 320/- in all, contending that she was
not required to pre-empt her own portion, that is,
7/15 share. Her application for pre-emption was
finally disallowed by a Single Bench on the ground
that the consideration money could not be split up.
the question of hardship on the part of the
pre-emptor was raised but it was ruled out relying
upon a decision of the Calcutta High Court in the
case Of Nurul Hossain Vs. Mihi Lal Sheikh (AIR
1948 Cal. 144) In that-case it was observed that "a
well settled rule of law should not be unsettled on
the ground of hardship in one or two individual
cases" but that "the certainty of the law should not
be disturbed by artificial constructions". It appears
that too much importance was given on the likely
inconvenience or difficulty in apportioning the
consideration money leaving out of consideration the
all important question as to what was meant by the
expression "a portion or a share of a holding
transferred". This "expression" means that the
co-sharer, by pre-empting the portion/share
tansferred to a stranger, he will keep in tact the
original holding excluding the stranger-purchaser
therefrom; and if he does not intend to pre-empt the
other holdings transferred it is presumed that he has
Waived his right to pre-empt them.

9. Mr. Gafur has referred to an observation of
his Court in the case of Haji Tozzamol Ali Vs.
Abdus Satter , 34 DLR (AD) 217, in which the
"doctrine", of partial pre-emption with its scope and
limitation was discussed when the question raised
there related to pre-emption by a contiguous land
holder. It is to be noted that under section 26(F) BT
Act right of pre-emption was given only to
co-sharer-tenants; but under Section 96, State
Acquisition and Tenancy ‘Act, this right has been
extended to a person who is not a co-sharer but who
has got a land contiguous to the land transferred. Of
course, right of pre-emption to such a person has
been given the last priority i.e. he can claim
pre-emption only when a co-sharer by inheritance or
a co-sharer by purchase docs not come to claim
pre-emption. In the 34 DLR case, as well as in two
other similar cases, Akhterunnessa Vs. Habibullah,
31 DLR (AD) 88 and Ahmed Hossain Vs. Basharat
Ali, 32 DLR (AD) 54, only contiguous land holders
claimed pre-emption on the ground of contiguity of
their lands to the lands transferred. It was held that
their right to pre-emption was limited to the extent
to which their own lands were-contiguous to the
lands transferred. "Rule" of bar of partial
pre-emption was discussed in all its aspects in those
cases and in the last mentioned case, where the land
transferred consisted of several plots and holdings
which were themselves contiguous to each other and
formed a single compact block, but the pre-emptor
got contiguity with one of those several plots or
holdings, then it was held, he was to claim
pre-emption of all the lands constituting the single
block and he was not permitted to leave out any part
therefrom. In 32 DLR case it was held that
‘contiguity’ was snapped and right to pre-emption
was barred when the "contiguity" was broken by a
public path lying in between the pre-emptor's land
and that sought to be pre-empted on the ground of
contiguity. In an earlier case—Makhan Lal Ys.
Reazuddin (13 DLR 323), already referred to by Mr.
Gafur, the High Court touched upon this question as
to extent of contiguity and held that the contiguous
land holder must pre-empt all the lands transferred if
these lands are contiguous to his own land. In the
instant case, the question of pre-emption by a
contiguous land holder is not involved, and as such
those decisions are not relevant except, of course, for
the purpose of keeping in mind the general principle
as to pre-emption, that is, convenience of the parties
involved.

10. Here in this case, five holdings we
transferred by a single kabala and consideration
money of each of the holdings was shown separately
in the kabala. The petitioner deposited the
consideration money for the four holdings he prayed
for by way of pre-emption; there was no difficulty in
allowing his prayer for pre-emption of the four
holdings as pre-emption is preferable holding-wise.
This pre-emption is not hit by the doctrine of partial
pre-emption. Section 96 gives right to a co-sharer-
tenant, like. the respondent-pre-emptor to purchase

            
            the "portion or share of a holding transferred" By the
pre-emption in question he is entitled to get those
portions or shares so that he could keep in tact the
original holding or holdings.

In the result the pre-emption, as allowed by the
High Court Division, is found to have been rightly
allowed. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed with costs.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,  | People's Republic of
MH Rahman J, ATM       | Bangladesh, represented by
Afzal J and Latifur    | General Manager (East)
Rahman J. 		     | Bangladesh Railway,
			     | Central Railway Building,
			     | Chittagong............
			     | ...... Defendant-Appellant
Judgment  	     	     | Vs.
			     |June 24, 1990. Most. Sharifjan Bibi and
			     | others...
			     | .....Plaintiff-Respondents*

Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 114

Acquisition of land for Railway—Two public
documents one being a copy of Gazette notification
of 1933 and the other the land's plan which were
more than thirty years old and filed as exhibits lead
to a presumption that official acts referred to therein
were regularly, performed and those documents were
sufficient to rebut the presumption of correctness of
RS and subsequent record of right*@ourts below
were wrong in putting too much reliance on the
records of right and in holding that since the relevant
LA Case records and proof of payment of
compensation for acquisition were not produced, the
Railway authority failed to prove their case of
acquisition and actual possession. 

ALN Satnappa Chetti & ors Vs. Thayyanyaki
Ammal, AIR 1942 Mad. 698; Anukul Chandra Chakravarti
Chairman, Dhaka Dist. Board, AIR 1928 Cal 485 ref.

... [10 (a), 13 & 14]
eee

*Civil Appeal No. 53 of 1986.
(From the judgment and Order dated 6 February
1986 passed by the High Court Division, Chittagong
Bench in Civil Revision No. 62 (Ctg) of 1983).

Government Lands & Buildings :
(Recovery of Possession) Act, 1952 (Act
X of 1953)

Sections 10 & 11

Land Acquisition Act (I of 1894)
Section 52

Bar of suit—The plaintiff brought the suit when
notice u/s 5 of Act X of 1953 was served but he did
not impugn this notice in the suit. In the guise of
the simple suit for permanent injunction he was in 
fact making a challenge to the acquisition of the suit
land by the Govt. which he could not do also in
view of the provision in section 52 of the Land
Acquisition Act.   ....(15-17)

Md. Mozammel Hoq Senior Advocate,
instructed by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on
-Record—For the Appellant

TH Khan, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court
(MA Wahab Mia Advocate, Supreme Court with
him) instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate
-on-Record — For the Respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
Dead. Substitution exampted vide Courts Order
dated 5.2.87 — Respondent No. 1.

Judgment

ATM Afzal J: This is a defendant's appeal 
by Ieave and directed against judgment and order 
dated 6 February 1986 passed by a Single Judge of
the High Court Division, Chittagong Bench, in
revision upholding the concurrent decision of the
Courts below decreeing the suit being OS No. 85 of
1975 of the 5th Court of Assistant Judge Sadar,
Chittagong.

2. One Abul Bashar, predecessor-in-interest of
the respondents, instituted Other suit No. 99 of
1968 in the Second Court of Assistant judge, Sadar,
Chittagong for permanent injunction against the
Chairman, Railway Board and the Government
restraining them from disturbing or interfering with
his possession of the suit land and evicting him of
demolishing his structure by force. The suit was
later transferred to the 5th Court of Assistant Judge
and numbered as OS No. 85 of 1975.

3. ‘It is alleged by the defendants that in the
year 1968 said Abul Bashar started construction of
some structures and houses and collected building
materials on the lands comprised in plot Nos. 8,9,

            
            6(P), 8(p) and 5 of RS Khatian Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 10
of Mouza Pahartali, measuring about 7.32 acres of
land belonging to the Railway which were acquired
under the Land Acquisition Act of 1894 for the then
Bengal Assam Railway by a Notification published
in the Calcutta Gazette dated 23rd November 1933
and made over to the said Railway on 5.1.1934 and
since then the said land was lying vacant, although
the Railway was in possession thereof. Having
found the said Abul Bashar to be in unauthorised
occupation of the aforesaid Railway land notice was
served on under the East Bengal Government
land and Buildings (Recovery of Possession) Act
1952 (Act X of 1953) directing to vacate the land and
 deliver possession thereof to the Railway by
15.8.1968 whereupon Abul Bashar instituted the suit
as aforesaid.

4. The case of the plaintiff is that in the last
revisional survey the suit land was recorded in
possession of the persons mentioned in RS Khatian
Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 9 of mouza Pahartali. One Korban
Ali had 14 annas share in Khatian No. 5 which was
inherited by his soi and on his death it devolved
upon Nur Hossain wo sold it to the plaintiff by a
registered kabala da‘ed 1.9.1964 for Tk. 4000/-. The
legal heirs of the racorded tenant in RS Khatian No.
7 transferred their in.erest to one Hafizur Rahman
who sold it to the plaintiff by registered kabala dated
28.5.66 for Tk. 7500/-. Schedule 3 land with other
lands were auction purchased by one Abul Khair in
Rent Execution case No. 385 of 1952 who took
delivery of possession through court and then sold it
to the plaintiff by registered kabala dated 23.1. 66 for
Tk. 2000/-. The plaintiff purchased the land of
Schedule 4 by registered kabala dated 27.11.64. for
Tk. 1500/- from Achia Khatun and other heirs of the
recorded tenants. Thus, Abul Bashai and on his death
the respondents acquired title to the suit land and
possessed the same ‘making improvement and raising
structures thereon. The RS Khatian stood in the
name of Abul Bashar who paid rent and after him the
substituted plaintiffs leave also been paying rent.

5. The defend ants contested the suit, inter alia,
on the ground that the suit was not maintainable as.
being barred under sections 10 and 12 of Act X of
1953, that the suit land was acquired for the. then
Assam Bengal Railway in LA Case No. 4 of
1933-34 as aforesaid and possession of the acquired
land was delivered to the Railway on 5.1.34, that as
the land was acquired after the revisional survey the
RS Khatians of the suit land remained unchanged
and accordingly, the SA Khatians stand in the name
of the original owners, that the original owners and
their legal heirs taking advantage of the RS Khatians
transferred the suit land to the plaintiff upon
suppressing the fact of acquisition and that the
plaintiff, accordingly, acquired no title to and interest
in the suit land by his alleged purchase.

6. The defendants in support of their case of
acquisition of the suit land for the Railway and
delivery of possession thereof to them filed a copy-
of the Notification dated 23rd November 1933
published in the Calcutta Gazette (Ext. C) and a
copy of the plan of land (Ext. B) (copies of ) which
have been annexed to Ieave petition as Annexures A
and B respectively. The Courts below, it appears,
felt with which the learned judge of the High Court
Division concurred, that the records of the relevant
LA Case having not been produced and no proof
having been furnished as to the actual acquisition of
the land upon payment of compensation the
defendants -failed to prove their case of “alleged
acquisition" and the “actual acquisition" of the suit
property by the Railway is very much
“questionable”. On the other hand, it was found that
the plaintiffs have been able to prove not only their
prima facie title which was validly acquired from the
legal heirs of the RS recorded owners but they are
admittedly in possession of the suit land and as such
the defendants cannot oust or evict the plaintiffs by
force. The Courts below having disbelieved
defendants’ case of acquisition of the suit land for the
Railway the suit was held to be maintainable and
not barred under Act X of 1953. The learned Judge of
the High Court Division found no error in this
finding also. The suit was accordingly decreed in
Favour of the plaintiffs by the trial Court and the
decree was affirmed in appeal and then in revision by
the impugned judgment and order.

7. Leave was granted to consider whether the
view taken by the courts below and approved by the
High Court Division to the effect that the defendants
failed to prove their case of acquisition without
proof of the payment of compensation and bringing
further evidence, beside what has been proved,
showing actual acquisition of the suit land, was
legal and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case.

            
            8. Mr. M Mozammcel Hog, learned advocate
for the appellant, Bangladesh Railway, submitted
that the courts below as also the learned judge of the
High Court Division failed to appreciate correctly
the two public documents Exts. B and C, proved by
the defendants which conclusively prove that the suit
land was acquired under the Land Acquisition Act of
~1894 in LA Case No. 4 of 1933-34 and possession
thereof was delivered to the then Assam Bengal
Railway on 5.1.34. Mr. Hoq also submitted that the
documents, Exts. B and C, being public documents
of more then 30 years old, the courts below as also
the court of revision instead of requiring further
evidence as to compensation, etc. ought to have
drawn a presumption that official acts referred to
therein have been regularly performed. It was also
submitted that the land in question having vested in
the Government and the possession of which was
delivered to the Railway, the bar of suit under Act X
of 1953 was clearly attracted which was ignored by
all the courts in view of the erroneous decision as to
valid acquisition of the suit land. Mr. Hoq further
submitted that the suit would also be barred under
section 52 of the Land Acquisition Act.

9. Mr. TH Khan, learned counsel for the
respondents, supported the findings made by the
courts below and encersed by the learned judge of the
High Court Division. He pointed out that the
defendants neither gave any evidence in support of
their case except filing Exts. B and C nor challenged
the evidence of the plaintiff by way of cross-
examination, particularly as to possession of the
plaintiffs and their predecessors-in-interest since the
time of preparation of the RS Record. Mr Khan
submitted that the presumption of regularity as to
official act should more appropriately be drawn in
Favour of the plaintiffs when the defendants have not
admittedly taken any step for correction of the RS
Record at any stage.

10. The impugned judgment of the High
Court Division is seen to be merely a paraphrasing
of the findings of the court of appeal below without
any real positive application of mind to the legal
aspects of the matter which arise for consideration. It
will be seen that the courts below disbelieved the
case of acquisition of the suit land for the Railway,
as in their opinion, Exts. B and C were not
sufficient to prove the same in the absence of proof
of payment of compensation and further evidence as
to LA Case record, etc. Reference has been made to
the various provisions of the Land Acquisition Act
to show the different stages which must fellow the
Notification made under section 4 of the said Act
containing a declaration of the Government that the
land was needed for a public purpose, That
declaration in the present case is Ext. c Which
shows that the Governor-in-Council was Satisfied
that the suit land was required to be taken by the
Government at public expense for a public purpose
Viz. for taking precaution to stop the large increase
of Malaria amongst the inhabitants of the quarters
North of the Gahar Nullah, in the village of lot 9
Pahartali then Double Moorings, District
Chittagong. The courts below did not question the ,
was that in the absence of proof of compensation,
etc. they were not sufficient to prove valid
acquisition of the land and possession by the
Railway. We do not think that due and proper
importance was attached to the public documents
Exts. B and C which were fairly ancient and thus had
a sanctity of their own. It cannot be denied
however, that there was some amount of laches,
either by default or by design, on the part of the
defendants in that they ought to have cross-examined
the plaintiff and led oral evidence as to the
availability or non-availability of the record of the
LA Case, the acquisition having place more than 40
years before the trial of the suit and the RS record 
remaining in the name of the plaintiff's predecessors.
Even so, the Notification Ext. C and the entries in
Ext. B have their own importance which cannot be
minimised. Ext. B, it has been noticed by the
Courts below, had been prepared in pursuance of
Rule 129 of the Land Acquisition Manual which
reads as follows:

"In all cases of permanent acquisition of
lands, a copy of the Amins plan showing the
lands actually acquired shall be preferred by the 
Land Acquisition Deputy Collector and as soon
as the awards have been made and possession of
the lands has been taken, it shall be furnished to
the authorities on whose behalf the lands are
acquired with the following certificate endorsed
upon it indelible black stamping ink Lane being used
whether the certificate is stamped or whether it
is written by hand;

"Certified that the lands in this plan were

            
            duly acquired under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1 of 1894, and under
declaration no..... of the and in proceedings
no..... of 19 .... and that they were made over
Oe" 5 on the rr on behalf of the collector of
by A, B om the .... on behalf of the (authority
on whose behalf the proceedings were taken)"
                                                   Sd/
                                                   Collector of

11. It will be seen that Ext. B meticulously
contains all the particulars mentioned in aforesaid
rule 129. The certificate therein. reads as follows;
Certified that the lands in this plan were
duly acquired under the provisions of the Land
Acquisition Act, 1 of 1894 and under
Declaration No. 13568 LA of the 21.11.1933
and in proceedings No. 4 of 1933-34 and that
they were made over by KK Chakravarty LA
surveyor on the 5.1.1934 on behalf of the
Collector of the Chittagong, District to Babu A
Bhushan
WO on behalf of the Assam Bengal
Railway Co. Ltd. KK Chakravarty.

12. From the two documents Exts. B and C
filed by the defendants which in fact signal the start
of the acquisition proceeding and culmination thereof
upon going through the various stages by making
over the acquired land to the Railway Authority
respectively, it can be reasonably held that the
acquisition proceeding was validly taken, carried on
and concluded with the handing over of possession of
the acquired land to the Railway Authority.

13. Mr. Mozammel Hoq submitted that the
defendant appellant, the Railway, was not expected
to nor could prove the various steps of the
acquisition proceeding after forty years of the
Conclusion of the acquisition case. The only material
documents which needed to be proved by the
railway (as the requiring body) were proved and
proper inferences and presumptions ought to have
been drawn on the basis of the entries made therein
Mr. submits. In this connection he has referred
to a single Bench decision, ALN Sathappa Chetti
and others Vs. Thayyanayaki Ammal, AIR (29)
1942 Madras 698 wherein it has been held that the
report of the revenue inspector is the report of an
officer made in the discharge of his duty, and it has to
be presumed what that he stated therein was true.
Mr. Hog also referred to another case, Anukul
Chandra Chakravarti Ys. Chairman, Dacca Dist.
Board, AIR 1928 Calcutta 485, where the district
Board of Dhaka got a decree against the appellant for
his ejectment from the suit land on the ground of
encroachment upon a public road belonging to the
District Board. The Division Bench while upholding
the concurrent decree of the courts below observed in
second appeal that the plaintiff, that is the district
Board, failed to prove the actual acquisition and
presession by the Government: and that 't also failed
to prove the actual delivery of the land by the
Government to it. The facts proved in that case were
that the Government expressed its intention to
acquire the land, that some necessary steps were
taken in pursuance of that resolution and that years
after that land was found in the possession of a
public body (the plaintiff). In these circumstances
the High Court held that a court of fact cannot be
said to be wrong in presuming that all the necessary
steps for the acquisition of the land and for the
transfer of the same to the public body were taken.
Mr Mozammel Hog contends that the facts of the
present case very nearly resembles those of the
Calcutta case: rather the present case is stronger in
that the fact of delivery of possession is
conclusively proved by the certificate in Ext. B but,
unfortunately, the courts below as well as the
learned Judge of the High Court Division failed to
presume the necessary facts which were correctly
presumed in the Calcutta case and had the approval
of the High Court. Mr Hoq submits on the principle
laid down in that case that the courts below and the
High Court Division must be held to be wrong in
not presuming that all the necessary steps for the
acquisition of the land and for transfer of the same to
the Railway were taken. We think the submission of
Mr. Mozammel Hog has a good deal of substance.

14. The courts below put too much reliance
on the RS and subsequent records of right wherein
the names of the plaintiff's vendors and their
predecessors-in-interest continued to remain. The
effect of Exts. B and C was underscored and it was
not appreciated that those documents were sufficient.
to rebut the presumption of correctness of the said
records of right. Evidently the plaintiffs do not and
cannot claim title on the basis of any adverse
possession even though they and their predecessors-
jn-interest may have been in possession of the land
from before, inasmuch as the statutory period

            
            required for the possession to be adverse against the
Government is yet to expire.

15. In view of the discussion above, the
conclusion which we arrive at is that the courts below
wrongly held that the defendants failed to prove their
case of acquisition and the said finding was wrongly
upheld in revision. If the suit land was the acquired
land which vested in the Government, which in fact it
was, then there cannot be any dispute that the bar
under Act X of 1953 was clearly attracted. Sections 10
and 12 of the said Act reads as follows:

10. No Civil Court shall pass an order in
any suit or procezding granting a temporary or
interim injunction restraining the Provincial
Government from taking possession of any

land, building or part of a building under this
Act.

12.(i) No suit or legal proceeding shall lic
against the Provincial Government in respect of
anything which is, in good faith, done or
intended to be dom, under this Act.

(2) No suit, prosecution or legal
proceeding shall lie against any person in
respect of anything which is, in good faith, done
or intended to be done, under this Act.

16. It has been noticed that the original
plaintiff brought the suit when notice under section
5 of the said Act was served upon him but he did not
impugn the said notice in the suit which he ought to
have done. In the guise of a simple suit for
permanent injunction the plaintiff was in fact
making a challenge to the acquisition of the land by
the Government. Section 52 of the Land Acquisition
Act provides:

52. No suit or other proceeding shall be
commenced or prosecuted against any person for
anything done in pursuance of this Act, without
giving to such person a month's previous notice
in writing of the intended proceeding, and of the

cause thereof, nor after tender of sufficient
amends,

17. Admittedly, the plaintiff gave no notice as
required under the said provision. It will be seen;
therefore, that the suit was barred not only under Act
X of 1953 but also under the Land Acquisition Act |
in terms of the aforesaid section. However, in view
of our more important finding that it was wrongly
held that the defendants failed to prove their case of
acquisition, the question of bar of suit becomes
more or less academic. We are clearly of the opinion
that Exts B and C are sufficient to prove that the
land in suit was validly acquired for the then Assam
Bengal Railway and possession thereof was delivered
to the Railway Authority in due course and the RS
Record does not correctly represent the fact of
possession.

The plaintiffs’ suit must, therefore, fail.

In the result, the appeal is allowed and the Suit
dismissed but in the facts of the case there will be,
no order as to cost.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Kazi Abdul Jalil...
ATM Afzal J, Mustafa  | ............Appellant,
Kamal J and Latifur   | 
Rahman J. 		    | Vs.
Judgment 		    | Jashim Munshi and
August 6, 1990. 	    | another....... Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Sec. 167(7)

Code of Criminal Procedure (Second)
(Amendment) Ordinance, XXIV of 1982
Section 35(d) |

Transitory Provisions, purpose of—
Investigation pending immediately before
commencement of the Ordinance—Magistrate did
not accept the Final Report and directed further
investigation—Police on further investigation
submitted chargesheet far beyond the "specified
period” of 60 days as stated in sec. 167 (5) and also
of 90 days as stated in sec. 35(d) of the Transitory
Provision—Charge-sheet was submitted one year
after the Magistrate's order for further investigation
Accused respondents, whether entitled to be release
-Provision in sec. 35(d) of the Ordinance is not
mandatory and intended to save an investigation

*Criminal Appeal No. 7 of 1986. 964
(From the judgment and order dated 1.8.1984
passed by the High Court Division, Barisal Bench, in
Criminal Revision No. 11 of 1984).


            
            which had started at the time when there was no time
limit for its conclusion—Investigation on which the
police submitted charge-sheet, not governed by sec.
167, and the charge-sheet not hit by sec. 167(7)
9 ;

 _consequently, the chargesheet stands. ...(4,6,8)


Joynul Abedin, Advocate, Supreme Court,
instructed by Mr. Ma. Aftab Hossain, Advocate on
record — For the Appellant.
Not Represented—Respondents.

Judgment

shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: In this appeal by
special leave the only question is whether the
investigation, on the basis of which the police
submitted charge-sheet against the accused-
respondents, is hit by sub-section (7) of section 167
of the Code of Criminal Procedure and consequently,
they are entitled to be released. The appellant's
contention is that since the investigation was
pending at the time of coming into force of
Ordinance No. XXIV of 1982 the Transitory
Provisions laid down in section 35(d) of this
Ordinance shall govern this investigation and that
these Transitory Provisions as to conclusion of an
investigation within the specified time are not
mandatory but are only directory.

2. The appellant lodged a first information
report to the police on 1 March 1982 alleging that
his brother had been murdered by the accused
tespondents whereupon the police held an
investigation, but they submitted final report on 13
November 1982; the Sub-divisional Magistrate,
however, did not accept the report and, by an order
dated 24 November 1982, directed further
Investigation into the case. The Police after holding
further investigation submitted charge-sheet against
the accused on 11 November 1983 under sections
302/34 of the Penal Code. The accused-respondents
challenged the charge-sheet and filed Criminal
Motion No. 71(1)/84 before the Sessions Judge,
Bakerganj for making a Reference under s. 438,
CrPC to the High Court Division for quashing the
charge-sheet taking the ground that the "specified
time" for completion of investigation having long
expired they ought to have been released under s. 167
(7). The learned Sessions Judge, by an order dated 8
March 1984, refused to make any reference observing
that the investigation in question was not governed
by s. 167 but was governed by the transitory
provision of Ordinance No. XXIV of 1982 as this
investigation was pending at the time of coming
into force of this Ordinance. The respondents
challenged the order of the Sessions Judge before the
High Court Division by an application under s.
561A CrPC; and the learned judges of the High
Court Division, by the impugned order dated 1
August 1984, accepted this contention of the
respondents, held that s. 167(5)(7) was applicable to
this case and accordingly quashed the entire
proceeding against the respondents—i.c. GR Case
No. 46 of 1982. Leave was granted by us to consider
whether this decision was correct in law.

3. The provision for specifying a time within
which an investigation by the Police is to be
completed was first introduced into the Code of
Criminal Procedure by an amendment by Ordinance
No. XXIV of 1982 with effect from 21 August
1982. Among others, section 167, which governs
investigations by the police, was thereby amended
by adding sub-scctions (5), (6), (7) and (8) thereto.
sub-section (5) provides that an investigation shall
be concluded by the police within sixty days from
the date of receipt of the information relating to the
commission of an offence, or from the date the
Magistrate orders for the investigation. The
Magistrate was empowered to extend this period in
appropriate cases by only one month. Sub-section (7)
provides that if investigation is not completed
within the "specificd time" or the "extended time",
further investigation shall be stopped and the
accused, if he is in custody, shall be released
forthwith. The Ordinance contained certain
“Transitory Provisions" in its section 35 relating to
pending cases, appeals and investigations. Sec. 35(d)
of the Ordinance provides that a pending
investigation shall be completed within ninety days;
but it does not say that if it is not completed within
this period, it shall be stopped and the accused shall
be released.

4. In the instant casc, the investigation was
pending immediately before the commencement of
this Ordinance. The Magistrate did not accept the.
final report of the police but directed the police to
hold further investigation; and the police, after
holding further investigation, submitted charge-
sheet, far beyond the "specified period” of sixty days,
as stated in section 167(5) and also of “ninety days"

            
            as stated in sec. 35(d) of the Transitory Provision. In
fact the charge-shect was submitted one year after the
magistrate's order for further investigation. If
sub-section (7) of sec. 167, read with sec. 35(d) of
the Ordinance applies to this investigation, it will be
invalid and the accused will be released. But
contention of Mr. Joynul Abedin, learned Advocate
for the appellant, is that sec. 167 shall not apply in
this investigation at all as the investigation was
pending on the date the Ordinance came into force
ic. 21 August 1982. And as to the Transitory
Provision, section 35(d), which also provides a time
limit for conclusion of a pending investigation, he
contends that this provision is not mandatory but is
purely directory. The relevant portion of section 35 of
the Ordinance, that is, clause (d) is quoted below:

(a) ................................................
(b) ................................................
(c) ................................................
(d) ................................................

(d) Any-investigation relating to an offence
other than an offence under section 400 or
section 401 of the Penal Code (Act XLV of
1860), which, immediately before the
commencement of this Ordinance, was pending
with any police-officer, shall be concluded
within a period of ninety days from the date of
such commencement;

(e) ................................................

5. Mr. Joynul Abedin contends that had this
provision in section 35(d) been mandatory, the
consequence for its non-observance would have been
definitely stated therein, as has been provided in
sub-section (7) of sec. 167, which is meant for
prospective investigations—from the date of
commencement of the Ordinance.


6. We think there is substance in this
contention that the provision in clause (d) of section
35 of the Ordinance is not intended to be mandatory.
The purpose obviously is to save an investigation
which had started at the time when there was no
time-limit for its conclusion. Had this provision
been intended to be mandatory, the consequence for
non-compliance thereof would have been definitely
mentioned, that is, it would have been provided that
if the pending investigation is not completed within
90 days, further investigation shall be stopped and
the accused, if in custody, shall be released.

7. Jt may be mentioned here that by this
Ordinance specified time limits were Provided also
for conclusion of trials and disposal of appeals and
revisions. A trial shall be concluded Within the
‘specified time’ or "extended time" as Provided in
section 339C, failing which, all further Proceedings
of the trial shall be stopped and the accused" shall
stand released." This shows that the provision in
sec. 339C is mandatory, Similarly, for disposal of
appeals and revisions time has been specified in
442A of the Code as well as in sec. 35(c) of the
Ordinance. Section 442A relates to appeals and
revisions filed after the commencement of the
Ordinance; section 35(c) relates to. appeals and
revisions which were pending immediately before
the commencement of the Ordinance; but in Neither
of these cases consequence of non-compliance of the
provision as to time-limit has been stated, This
means these provisions are not mandatory but are
only directory.

We, therefore, clearly find that the investigation
on which the Police submitted charge-sheet against
the accused-respondents is not governed by section
167 and that the charge-sheet is not hit by
sub-section (7) of this section. Consequently the
charge-sheet stands. The impugned order of the High
Court Division is set aside and that of the Sessions
Judge is restored. The appeal is allowed.

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

MH Rahman J, ATM      | Dhanu Mia (Md) and
J, Mustafa Kamal J    | another...........
and Latifur Rahman J. | ...........Accused-Appellants
Judgement 		    | Vs.
February 25, 1991.    | The State...Respondent*


Bail

Bail in a case where the sentence is of short
duration—In the present case the sentence is of two
years and the disposal of the appeal in question
normally takes time. In that circumstances the High
Court Division ought to have exercised judicial
discretion in the matter of granting bail to the
appellants. The judicial discretion having not been
properly exercised in the facts of the case the order is
set aside and the appeal allowed. ses, (4)

Sajjadul Hug, Advocate-on-Record—For the
Appellants.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by Sharifuddin Chakiader, Advocate-on-Record—For
the Respondent.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: This appeal calls in
question the judgment of the High Court Division,
Comilla Bench, passed in Criminal Appeal No. 137
of 1988 refusing bail of the appellants.

2. The prosecution case, in brief, is that the
accused appellants were caught by the Law Enforcing
Agencies while trying to smuggle out some cloth of
Various origin across the border to India. On that
allegation the accused-appellants were tried by the
Additional Sessions Judge, Anti-Smuggling
Tribunal, Comilla and were convicted under section
25B(1) of the Special Powers Act and sentenced to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for 2 years and to pay
a fine of Tk. 500.00, in default to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for 15 days. Against that aforesaid
conviction and sentence, the appellants preferred

*Criminal Appeal No..12 of 1989.

Crimes by the High Court Division, Comilla Bench in
nal Appeal No. 137 of 1988) ,

(From the judgment and order dated 14.12.1988 .

Criminal Appeal No. 137 of 1988 before the High
Court Division and the same was admitted for
hearing on 14.12.88. But the prayer for bail of the
appellants was rejected.

3. Leave was granted to consider whether the
learned Single Judge of the High Court Division
failed to exercise his discretion justly and properly in
refusing bail in a case where the scntencc is of a
short duration.and refusal of bail will render the
appeal infructuous in the event of success of the
appeal.

4. In the present case the sentence is of two
years and the disposal of such appeal normally takes
time and in that circumstances the learned Single
Judge of the High Court Division ought to have
exercised his judicial discretion in the matter of
granting bail to the appellants. The judicial
discretion having not been properly exercised in the
facts of the present case, we set aside the impugned
order and allow the appeal.

Consequently, the appeal is allowed. Let the
appellants be enlarged on ad-interim bail to the
satisfaction of the Deputy Commissioner, Comilla
till disposal of the Criminal Appeal No. 137 of
1988 now pending in the High Court Division.

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

MH Rahman J, ATM | Baneazuddin Ahmed and
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | others................
and Latifur Rahman J. | ...... Accused-Appellants
Judgment | Vs.
January 15, 1991. | The State...Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 439

Direction for filing a separate application for bail
while moving a revisional application whether

“proper—when the appellants were already on_ bail

granted by the lower Appellate Court, the direction
that has been given after rejecting the prayer for bail
is not proper and is not in keeping with the normal
practice and procedure that is traditionally followed in
the High Court Division in revision. In that view of
the matter, the appellants will remain on bail already
granted, till disposal of the revision case.

Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, Senior Advocate,
instructed by Serajur Rahman, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Appellants.

B Hossain, Deputy Attorney-General, instructed
by M Nowab Ali, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: This appeal is directed
against the order of a Single Judge of the High Court
Division in Criminal Revision No. 21 of 1989
refusing bail of the appellants at the time of issuing
Rule arising from an order of conviction under
section 323 of the Penal Code wherein the appellants
were sentenced to suffer simple imprisonment for 4
(four) months and also to pay a fine.

2. The accused-appellants were put on trial in
an offence under section 323 of the Penal Code and
the learned Magistrate convicted them to suffer
simple imprisonment for four months and also to
Ray a fine of Taka $(0.00 each, in default to suffer
simple imprisonment for further two months. On

*Criminal Appeal No. 6 of 1989.

(From the judgment and order dated 25.1.1989
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Criminal
Revision No. 21 of 1989),

appeal the learned Additional Session Judge,
Court, Dhaka affirmed the aforesaid Order of
conviction and sentence. While disposing of the
appeal, the learned lower Appellate Court in exercise
of its power under section 426 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure granted provisional bail to the
accused appellants upto 29.1.89 by its order dated
14.12.88 affording them an opportunity to prefer a
Revisional application before the High Court
Division. The Revisional application was moved
before the High Court Division on 25.1.89 with the
certified copy of the order of the lower Appellate
Court granting ad interim bail to the appellants.

3. The pertinent question that now comes up
for consideration in this appeal is, whether in view
of the ad interim bail granted by the lower Appellate
Court to move the High Court Division in revision,
the learned Single Judge of the High Court Division
acted properly in refusing the prayer for bail and at
the same time directing the appellants to surrender
after 29.1.89 and file a separate application for bail
before the High Court Division,

4. Dr. Rafiqur Rahman, learned Advocate
appearing for the appellants, submits that normally
in a revisional application the prayer for bail is
incorporated in the application itself and there is no
Practice or rule of the court for filing a separate
application for bail while moving a revisional
application and on that score the learned Single
Judge of the High Court Division acted wrongly in
refusing bail of the appellants and directing for filing
a separate application after surrender, particularly in
this case, when the revisional application was
moved with the certified copy of the ad interim bail
granted by the lower Appellate Court.


5. It appears that the appellants were convicted
under section 323 of the Penal Code and sentenced to
suffer simple imprisonment for 4 months and in that
view of the matter, the lower Appellate Court in
exercise of its power under section 426 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure suspended the execution of
the sentence, pending filing of the revisional
application before the High Court Division. The ad
interim bail was granted by the lower Appellate
Court till 29.1.89 and the revisional application was
moved on 25.1.89 i.e. during the existence of the ad
interim bail granted by the lower Appellate Court.
In such circumstances, it was not proper for the 
learned Single Judge of the High Court Division to.




            
            direct appellants to surrender after 29.1.89 and
then to move a separate application for bail before
the High Court Division. Further, in the present
case, the offence is under section 323 of the Penal
Code which is a bailable one and the sentence is also
of a short duration When the appellants were already
on bail granted by the lower Appellate Court, the
direction that has been given in the present case by
the learned Single Judge of the High Court Division
by rejecting the prayer for bail is not proper and is
not in keeping with the normal practice and
procedure that is traditionally followed in the High
Coutt Division in revision. The learned Single Judge
of the High Court Division it appears did not
exercise his discretion properly in the facts of the
present case. In that view of the matter, we allow the
appeal and direct that the appellants will remain on
bail already grunted, till disposal of the Criminal
Revision No. 21 of 1989 pending before the High
Court Division, Dhaka.

Ed.
SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Mahbubul Alam
ATM Afzal J, Mustafa  | Chowdhury and others
Kamal J and Latifur   | ....................Appellants
Rahman J. 		    | Vs.
Judgment 		    | Chaman Ara Begum and
August 14, 1990,      | others......Respondents*

The Partnership Act (IX of 1931)
Section 14

Partnership property—This section is in the
nature of an inclusive definition not properly
defining the expression "the property of the firm".
But Property, rights and interests in property of four
different kinds are included in its first paragraph
which are all partnership properties "subject to
contract between the partners." Its second paragraph
includes a fifth kind  of property and rights and
interests in property if the same is acquired with
money belonging to the firm “unless the contrary


Civil Appeal No. 7 of 1986.
(From the judgment and decree dated 15.8.84
passed by the High Gourt Division, Chittagong Bench
in Firsst Appeal No. 158 of 1964)

intention appears", introducing a legal fiction which
creates a rebuttable presumption. The decision of the
question whether a disputed property is or is not a
partnership property would depend upon the
intention of the partners. Evidence is admissible to
show that a contrary intention governed the
transaction which may justifiably be gathered from
the purpose of acquisition of property and mode in
which it has been dealt with. These considerations
are germane to the determination of contrary
intention. ....(9-16)

Section 69(2)

When the suit properties are not partnership
properties the bar of this section against instituting
the suit in question is not attracted. .. (17)

Syed Ishtiag Ahmed, Senior Advocate, Mahmudul
Islam, Advocate with him instructed by Md. Aftab
Hossain, Advocate-on-Record—F or the Appellants.

SR Pal, Senior Advocate instructed by Mr.
Aminul Hug, Advocate-on-Record—For the
Respondent Nos. 1-8.

Ex parte—Respondent Nos. 9-19.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: Whether the immovable
town and country properties of Schedules 1Ka, 2, 3
and 5 of the plaint, standing jointly in the names of
the predecessors of the defendant-appellants and
plaintiff-respondents, are in fact. partnership
properties or personal properties of both, is the
precise question that falls for determination in this
appeal by special leave by the defendant-appellants
from the judgment and decree of a Division Bench of
the High Court Division, Chittagong Bench, in
First Appeal No. 158 of 1964 dated 15.8.84,
decreeing the suit and setting aside those of the
learned Subordinate Judge, 2nd Court, Chittagong
dated 24.12.63 in Title Suit No. 13 of 1962,
dismissing the suit.

2. Jahirul Kayum Chowdhury (since deceased)
claimed as plaintiff the schedule movable and
immovable properties to the extent of 8 annas
against defendant No. 1 Ahmed Kabir Chowdhury
(since deceased) and sought partition of the same in
Title Suit No. 53 of 1959 later re-numbered as
19/61, 18/62 and lastly 13/62 of the 2nd Court‘of
Subordinate Judge, Chittagong. The plaintiff

            
            claimed that he and defendant No. 1 were close
relations. He stated in paragraph 2 of the plaint, the
plaintiff and the defendant No. 1 had eared a lot of
money as partners to each other by doing contract
business in the offices of the Chittagong District
Board, East Bengal Railway and East Bengal
Railway Food Supply Department, etc. For the
interest and benefit of both of them they had
purchased and earned the movable and immovable
properties of the schedules below, with the monies
of the ejmali fund of the said business belonging to .
both of them and they both were in enjoyment and
possession through the above kind of purchased
interest". Further, in paragraph 10 of the plaint, he
stated, "the proof of the joint business and joint fund
of the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 the partnership
deed on stamped paper was executed by both and the
copy was submitted in the Income-tax office at
Chittagong for the assessment of income tax along
with a copy thereof. The defendant No. 1 deceitfully
took back the original deed from the Income-tax
office and kept the same in hiding. The said original
deed was registered under section 26A of the
Income-tax Act. A duplicate copy of the original
deed executed by both parties is with the plaintiff".
The duplicate copy is Ext. 8 in the suit. Further
statements in paragraph 9Ka were, "After the
termination of the work of the Railway contract in
the year 1949 and at the time of the dispute in
September 1951, the aforesaid firm—AK
Chowdhury and JK Chowdhury, was dissolved
mutually and the existence thereof has become
extinct".

3. Defendant No. 1 totally denied the
partnership in his written statement and claimed that
the plaintiff was a paid Manager under him on a
monthly salary of Tk. 100.00 and that taking
advantage of his frequent absence from Chittagong in
connection with his business, the wily plaintiff
obtained his signature on blank papers and
manufactured a false partnership deed and created
documents of title in their joint names, although in
actual fact there was no such joint fund and the
properties in the schedule were exclusively acquired
by defendant No. 1 alone from his personal fund for
his own exclusive use, enjoyment and occupation.
There was no partnership business at all. District
Board, Railway and other businesses were all his
personal businesses. The suit is also barred under
section 69(2) of the Partnership Act.

4. The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court,
on the finding that the plaintiff had failed to prove
that he and defendant No. 1 had any joint contract
business under the Railway and the District Board,
that there was any kind of joint fund or joint
investment and that the plaintiff paid any part of any
consideration for the acquisition of the Schedule
properties. As there is no evidence that the
partnership was dissolved the suit is barred Under
section 69(2) and section 46 of the Partnership Act

5. On appeal the High Court Division
reversed the finding of the Trial Court by holding
first, that the plaintiff has proved that he and
defendant No. 1 were partners in the firm—M/s, Ak
Chowdhury and JK Chowdhury ‘which started work
in 1946 and continued up to March 1949, secondly,
the plaintiff was not a paid Manager under defendant
No. 1, thirdly, the suit properties were acquired from
the income of the joint fund of the partnership
business, not for the partnership business itself or
for the benefit of the firm, but for the benefit of the
partners as individuals and as such those were not
partnership properties under section 14 of the
Partnership Act, fourthly, the suit is not barred
under section 69(2) of the Partnership Act because
this is a suit by an ex-partner in his capacity as an
individual for determination of his share and
partition of certain joint properties where the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1 have joint title, and
lastly, the suit is also not barred by limitation under
the First Schedule to Article 106 of the Limitation
Act. The High Court Division, however, did not
decree the suit in full in favour of the plaintiff. Only
those properties which stood in the joint names of
the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 namely, properties
described in Schedules 1Ka 2, 3 and 5 of the plaint
were decreed in his favour. Properties standing
exclusively in the name of defendant No. 1 and
movable properties were not decreed,

6. Leave was granted to consider whether there
was any partnership in this case and, if so, wh iten
was dissolved and also what are the implications
after the dissolution of the partnership, alternatively ;
whether this was only a mere casé of properties held
in joint names.

7. Mr. Syed Ishtiag Ahmed, learned Counsel for
the defendant-appellants, however, has not questioned
the finding of the High Court Division that there was
A partnership agreement between the plaintiff and

=

            
            defendant No. 1 and that the decretal properties were
acquired not exclusively by defendant No. 1, but
jointly by both the plaintiff and defendant No. 1. He
submits in the first place, that upon the averments
made in the plaint itself, contrary evidence of which is
not permissible, the properties decreed in Favour of the
plaintiff were purchased with money belonging to the
firm and are as such ipso facto partnership properties
under the second paragraph of section 14 of the
Partnership Act and, secondly, there being no evidence
that the partnership was at all dissolved, the suit is
bared under section 69(2) of the Partnership Act.

8. Mr. SR Pal, learned Counsel for the
plaintiff-respondents, submits on the other hand that
the High Court Division has correctly considered the
purpose for which the schedule properties were
acquired and the mode in which those have been dealt
with and have correctly come to the conclusion that
those were not partnership properties. As such the
bar of section 69(2) is not applicable, he submits.

Section 14 of the Partnership Act is quoted as
- follows: :

"14. Subject to contract between the
partners, the property of the firm includes all
property and rights and interests in property
originally brought into the stock of the firm, or
acquired, by purchase or otherwise, by or for the
firm, or for the purposes and in the course of the
business of the firm and includes also the
good-will of the business. °

Unless the contrary intention appears,
Property and rights and interests in property
acquired with money belonging to the firm are
deemed to have been acquired for the firm",

9. Section 14 is in the nature of an inclusive
definition, it does not properly define the expression
"the property of the firm". But property and rights
are interests in property of the following four kinds
are included in the first paragraph of the definition
which are all partnership properties "subject to
contract between the partners":

“All property and rights and interests in
Property—

(a) originally brought into the stock of the
firm or

(b) acquired by purchase or otherwise, by
or for the firm; or

(c) for the purposes, and in the course of
the business of the firm; and

(d) good-will of the business"

10. The second paragraph of section 14,
however, includes a fifth kind of property and rights
and interests in property if the same is acquired with
money belonging to the firm, "unless the contrary
intention appears". Thus a legal fiction has been
created. Though property acquired with money
belonging to the firm may not have been acquired for
the firm, yet, by a legal fiction, the said property is
"deemed to have been acquired for the firm", "unless
the contrary intention appears". The legal fiction
creates only a rebuttable presumption. Even when the
purchase moncy is money belonging to the firm, that
fact itself is not decisive. In a case of this nature, the
decision of the question whether the disputed property
is or is not a partnership property would depend upon
the intention of the partners as the second paragraph
of section 14 specifically lays down. Evidence is
admissible to show that a contrary intention governed
the transaction. The contrary intention may
justifiably be gathered by (a) the purpose for which
the property was acquired; and (b) the mode in which
it has been dealt with. These two considerations, it
appears, are germane to the determination of contrary
intention. The second paragraph of section 14 is
analogous to section 21 of the Partnership Act, 1890
of England and Lindley in his Treatise on the Law of
Partnership 11th edition, 1949 p. 408 observed as
follows:

"It is for the partners to determine by
agreement amongst themselves what shall be
the property of the firm, and what shall be the
separate property of one or more of them. If
there is no express agreement, attention must be
paid to the source whence the property: was
obtained, the purpose for which it was acquired,
and the mode in which it has been dealt with".

11. Coming now to the facts of the case, the
plaintiff stated in the plaint, “for the interest and
benefit of both of them they had purchased and
earned the movable and immovable properties of the
schedules below, with the monies of the ejmali fund
of the said business belonging to both of them and
they both were in enjoyment and possession _
"through the above kind of purchased interest", In
his examination-in-chief as PW 7 the deceased
plaintiff stated as follows:

            
            "We took the money from the profit and
met expenses and purchased village and town
properties and immovables. Some of the
properies were purchased in the names of
(partners) both of us and some in my name and
some in the name of defendant 1. Both of us
have got equal share in the suit properties.

These properties were not acquired for the 
purpose or interest of partnership business.

                                          (Emphasis added)

In cross examination he stated—

"Consideration money were paid equally
fund of the partnership(sic). After accountment
(sic) balance of profit were (sic) taken
annually",

12. The plaintiff not only pleaded in his plaint
(a) the purpose for which the properties were acquired
and (b) the mode in which those have been dealt

with, but also Ied oral and documentary evidence to
that effect.

13. The learned Subordinate Judge held that
there was no evidence of any joint fund and no
witness has testified to the same. The plaintiff has
made out a third case in his evidence in respect of the
payment of consideration money, because there is no
paper to show that there was ever any accounting not
to speak of annual accounting and no evidence either
that there was receipt of the balance of profit by
either the plaintiff or the defendant. The learned
Subordinate Judge held that the plaintiff is
thoroughly inconsistent and obviously impatient in
his statement about the source of payment and
manner of payment of the consideration. These
observations were made in consideration of two
specific issues framed by the learned Subordinate
_ Judge, namely, issue No. (7), "Was there any joint
fund of the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 as alleged
by the plaintiff and whether the money required for
purpose of the properties were paid from any such
joint fund? Did plaintiff contribute any money for
acquisition of these properties 2", and issue No. (12),
“Were the disputed properties acquired by the fund of
the defendant No. 1 ? Is he the owner possessing the
same exclusively ? The main thrust of the learned
Subordinate Judge's inquiry was the source of
consideration money.

14. The High Court Division addressing itself
on the same issues has held that it-is nobody's case
that the consideration money was paid for by the
firm. The plaintiff explained the source but his
statements went unchallenged. The plaintiff and
defendant No. 1 paid the consideration money in
halves. All the documents of title of the schedule
properties were coming from the custody of the
plaintiff. The khatians, municipal Assessment
registers, etc. stand in the joint names of the
plaintiff and defendant No. 1. The properties were
not used for partnership business. The High Court
Division considering the oral and document
evidence in detail concluded that the properties Were
acquired by them jointly for their own benefit and
not for the benefit of the partnership and therefore,
under section 14 of the Partnership Act read with
section 45 of the Transfer of Property Act the
properties in suit were not partnership properties,

15. In the face of these findings, it is largely
academic as to whether the consideration money was
paid for from the money belonging to the firm. The
plaintiff made positive statements in the plaint that
the schedule properties were purchased "for the
interest and benefit" of both the partners and not for
the firm itself. He led evidence to that effect,
accepted by the High Court Division. It is too late
in the day to assert that because of the acquisition of
the properties by money belonging to the firm,
these are ipso facto partnership properties. The
plaintiff has proved the "contrary intention” to the
hilt.

16. Mr. Ahmed's further submission that the
tests, namely, (a) the purpose for which the
properties were acquired; and (b) the mode in which
those have been dealt with, are to be applied in
connection with properties mentioned in paragraph 1
of section 14, not in connection with those in
paragraph 2, has obviously no basis and is not
supported by any authority.

17. With regard to the second contention of
Mr. Ahmed, suffice to say that when the suit
properties are not partnership properties the bar of
section 69(2) of the Partnership Act is not attracted
and the High Court Division is correct in answering
this issue in the negative.
For all the above reasons we do not find any
merit in the appeal which is dismissed without
however, any order as to costs.

Ed.

———

            
            
SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Abdul Mannan and others
MH Rahman J, ATM      | .......Appellants
Afjal J and Latifur   |
Rahman J. 		    |Vs,
Judgment 		    | Akram Ali and others.....
June 6, 1990. 	    | ...................Respondents*

code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Section 115

Remand—When revisional Court need not pass
order of remand—The revisional application could be
disposed of by the High Court Division without
sending the case on remand to the Trial Court. Both
oral and documentary evidence having been available
on record there was no necessity for the remand as
ordered by the High Court Division.   ........(2 & 3)


MH Khondkar, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, (AJ Mohammad Ali Advocate, Supreme
Court, with him) instructed by Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

SR Pal, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court,
(Ranadhir Sen, Senior Advocate, Supreme Court,
with him) instructed by Md. Sajjadul Huq,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondents Nos.
1-12
Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent Nos. 26 & 27.
Ex parte — Respondents 13-25.

Judgment
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: This appeal by
Special leave, at the instance of the plaintiffs, calls
in question the judgment and order of the High Court
Division in Revision remanding the case to the Trial
Court for re-trial.

2. Appellants filed Title Suit No. 27 of 1981
in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Sylhet, for
declaration of their title to the suit land on the basis
of Settlement from the landlords, by continuous



*Civil Appeal No. 29 of 1986.
(From the Judgment and order dated dated
17.784 Passed by the High Court Division, Sylhet
Bench In Civil Revision No. 226(C) of 1982.)

possession and payment of rent. Defendants
respondents challenged the settlement. The trial
Court found that the plaintiffs could not
satisfactorily prove their title but they proved their
possession on the suit land. Nevertheless, the trial
Court dismissed the suit on the ground that the
identity of the suit land could not be ascertained in
the absence of any local investigation. This decision
was Challenged in appeal, Title Appeal No. 27 of
1981. The appellate Court while concurring in the
trial Court's finding as to possession found the
plaintiffs’ title by settlement on the basis of rent
receipts, Ext. 8 series. It did not find any difficulty
in ascertaining the suit land and therefore, allowed
the appeal and decreed the suit by judgment dated 3
September, 1982. This judgment was challenged by
two Revisional Applications (CR Cases Nos. 226
and 283 of 1982) before the High Court Division |
which by the impugned judgment dated 17 July,
1984 set aside the appellate Court's judgment and
ordered remand of the case to the trial Court
observing that the appellate Court's finding as to
tile was based on misreading of evidence,
particularly the rent receipts (Ext. 8 series). Leave
was granted by us to consider the contention on
behalf of the plaintiffs-appellants that there was no
misreading of evidence on the part of the Appellate
Court, rather there was concurrent finding of the two
courts below in respect of possession and that the
entire evidence, both oral and documentary, having
been available on record there was no necessity for
the remand.

3. We have heard Mr. MH Khondkar, Icarned
Counsel for the appellants and Mr. SR Pal, Icarned
Counsel for the respondents. Mr. MH Khondker has
referred to the judgment in which evidence of PW 2,
among others, was discussed. This witness gave
testimony that Ext. 8 series were written by the
landlord's karmachary in his presence. Learned
Counsel, therefore, contends that there is no basis ©
for the observation of the Revisional Court that Ext.
8 series were not legally proved. Unfortunately
preparation of the paper book having been dispensed
with at the instance of the appellants, we could not
examine the evidence including Ext. 8 series, Both
the learned Counsels are, however, of the opinion
that the Revisional applications should better be
disposed on merit by the High Court Division itself
on the basis of the evidence already on record. We
think that the Revisional applications could be


            
            disposed of by the High Court Division without
sending the case on remand to the trial Court.

4. In the result, the appeal is allowed. The
impugned judgment and order of the High Court
Division is set aside, and it is directed that the
Revisional Applications be disposed of by the High
Court Division on merit. There will be no order as
to costs. Again, learned Counsels of both the parties
have submitted that it would be convenient to all if
the Revisional Applications are heard by any
appropriate Bench of the High Court Division at
Dhaka, instead of by any Bench at Comilla or Sylhet
Session. This submission is quite reasonable. The
Registrar is directed to put up the matter to the Chief
Justice for necessary order as to transfer of the case,

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

MH Rahman J, ATM    | Bangladesh Sangbadpatra
Afzal J, Mustafa    | Parishad (BSP) represented by
Kamal J and Latifur | its Secretary General Anwarul
Rahman J, 		  | Islam........Petitioner
			  | Vs.
			  | The Government of the
Judgment 		  | People's Republic of Bangla-
July 15, 1991, 	  | desh, represented by its
			  | Secretary, Ministry of Infor-
		        | mation and four others........
			  |.................... Respondents*

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Articles 39 & 102

Newspaper Employees (Conditions of
Service) Act (XXX of 1974)
Sections 9, 10(3) & 11

"Person aggrieved"—Its meaning and dimension
—In our Constitution the petitioner seeking
enforcement of a fundamental right must be a person
aggrieved. Our Constitution is not at pari materia
with the Indian Constitution on this point. The
decisions of the Indian jurisdiction on public interest
litigation are hardly apt in our situation. The

*Civil petition for leave to Appeal No. 160 of 1991.
(From the Judgement and Order dated 30.5.91
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Writ
Petition No. 383 of 1991),


petitioner is not acting pro bono publico but in
interest of its members. The real question in this
case is whether the petitioner has the right to move
the writ petition in a representative capacity, The
High Court Division has rightly relied UPON the case
of 29 DLR 188 where the question has been
answered in the negative. The petitioner may
represent the employers in the Wage Board but its
locus standi to act on behalf of its members in an
application under Art. 102 of the Constitution is
just not there.

Bar Council of Maharashtra Vs. MV Dabholkar, AIR
1975 (SC) 2092; The Bar Council of Maharashtra Vs, MV
Dabholkar, AIR 1976 (SC) 242; Fertilizer Corporation:
Kamgar Union Vs. Union of India and others, AIR 1981
(SC) 344; S.P. Gupta and others Vs. President of India and
others, AIR 1982 (SC) 149; DS Nakera and others Vs,
Union of India, AIR 1983 (SC) 130; Bandhu Mukti 
Morcha Vs. Union of India, AIR 1984 (SC) 802 and Dr.
DC Wadhwa and others Vs. State of Bihar, AIR 1987 (SC) 
579 held not applicable.

Asrarul Hossain and Khandker Mahbubuddin
Ahmed, Senior Advocates (Md. Joynul Abedin,
Advocate with them) instructed by Md. Aftab
Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner,

MA Wadud Bhuiyan, Additional
Attorney-General, instructed by Sharifuddin
Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For Respondent
No. 1.

AR Yousuf, Senior Advocate instructed by M
Nowab Ali Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 5.

Not Represented — Respondent Nos. 2-4.

Judgment
Mustafa Kamal J: Bangladesh Sangbadpatra
Parishad (BSP), an association of owners of
newspapers and news organisations, registered under
the Societies Registration Act, represented by its
Secretary General, challenged (a) sections 9,  10(3)
and 11 of the Newspaper Employees (Conditions of
Service) Act, 1974 (Act No. XXX of 1974), shortly
the Act, as unconstitutional and (b) the constitution of the Fourth Wage Board and the interim award
dated 30.12.90 given by the Fourth Wage Board in
so far as payment of dearness allowance, gratuity and
income-tax is concerned, in Writ Petition No. 383
of 1991, A Rule Nisi was issued, but the Rule was


            
            discharged by the High Cour Division by judgment
and order dated 30.5.91 on a preliminary point as to
the locus standi of the petitioner, it being help that
the petitioner was not a "person aggrieved" within
the meaning of Article 102 of the Constitution.

2. The petitioner seeks leave from the 
judgement of the High Court division.

3. The Act was enacted for the purpose of
ameliorating the service conditions of the newspaper
employees by fixing minimum wages, as a measure
of protection against exploitation by the employers,
Section 9 provides for constitution of Wage Board
for fixing the rates of wages, Section LQA3) provides
that the decision of the Wage Board fixing rates of
wages shall be communicated as soon as practicable
to the Government and section 11 provides that
within one month from the period of receipt of the
decision of the Board it will be published in the
Bangladesh Gazettes whereupon it will come into
effect from the date specified in the decision,
remaining in force until modified or varied by a later
decision of the Board.

4. The first, second and third Wage Boards
were constituted on 26.7,74, 11,9.82 and 27.11.85
respectively Their decisions were published on
30.4.77, 27.10.83 and 28.9.89 respectively, The
fourth Wage Board was constituted on 20.11.89 and
an interim award was given by the said Board on
30.12.90.
5. The petitioner's grievance is that only one
Wage Board can be constituted under the Act.
Constitution of successive Wage Boards is not
Permissible, All the Awards of all the Wage Boards
were given only by the Chairman thereof. These
Were one-man decisions. Sections 9, 10(3) and 11 of
the Act are violative of Article 39 of the
Constitution guaranteeing freedom of the press.

6. The High Court Division did not pronounce
upon the merit of the petitioner's case. The petition
stumbled upon the threshold requirement of the
petitioner being an “aggrieved person within the
meaning of Article 102 of the Constitution, It held
that the Petitioner has no direct personal interest In
the Act Or in the implementation of the Wage Board
award. "It is not liable to pay anything to anybody
under the award in question but it is the owners of
the individual newspapers who are to pay and they
are aggrieved". “It has nothing to lose or
Win by the impugned award". It has also considered a
number of decisions cited from the Bar both ways.

7. Mr, Asrarul Hossain, learned Counsel for
the petitioner, submits that in a case involving
Violation of the fundamental right of freedom of the
press under Article 39 of the Constitution almost
everybody including the petitioner had/has interest to
challenge the Act and the impugned award as illegal
and unconstitutional since such right of freedom of
the press has wider import and universal application
assuming the proportion of a public interest
litigation, He cites a number of decisions from the
Indian jurisdiction, namely, Bar Council of
Maharashtra Vs. MY Dabholkar, AIR 1975 (SC)
2092: The Bar Council of Maharashtra Vs. MV
Dabholkar, AIR 1976 (SC) 242; Fertilizer
Corporation Kamgar Union Ys. Union of India and
others, AIR 1981 (SC) 344; S.P. Gupta and others
Ys. President of India and others, AIR 1982 (SC)
149; DS Nakera and others Ys. Union of India, AIR
1983 (SC) 130; Bandhu Mukti Morcha Vs. Union
of India, AIR 1984 (SC) 802 and Dr. DC Wadhwa
and others Ys. State of Bikar, AIR 1987 (SC) 579
in support of his submission.

8. Mr. Asrarul Hossain also submits that it is
the petitioner which was recognised by the
Government as part of the award-making process
treating it as the only representative of the
newspaper owners. Therefore as an association of the
newspaper owners it had/has sufficient interest in the
subject-matter of the writ petition and it is not just a
busy-body.

9. In our Constitution the petitioner seeking
enforcement of a fundamental right or constitutional
remedies must be a “person aggrieved". Our
Constitution is not at pari materia with the Indian
Constitution on this point, The Indian Constitution,
either in Article 32 or in Article 226, has not
mentioned who can apply for enforcement of
fundamental rights and constitutional remedies. The
Indian Courts only honoured a tradition in requiring
that the petitioner must be an "aggrieved person”.
The emergence in Indian of pro bono publico
litigation, that is litigation at the instance of a
public-spirited citizen espousing causes of others,
has been facilitated by the absence of any
constitutional provision as to who can apply for a
writ. In England, various tests were applied.
Sometimes it was said that a person must be

            
            "aggrieved" or he must have “a specific legal right"
or he must have a “sufficient interest". Now, after 
the introduction of the new Rules of the Supreme 
Court, Order 53 Rule 3, any person can apply for 
"Judicial review" in England under the Supreme
Court Act, 1981 if he has a "sufficient interest". interference,

10. Therefore the decisions of the Indian
jurisdiction on public interest litigation are hardly
apt in our situation. We must confine ourselves to Ed.
asking whether the petitioner is an “aggrieved
person", a phrase which has received a meaning and a
dimension over the years. 

11. Neither in the Act nor in the Fourth Wage 
Board award a right has been created in favour of the
petitioner nor an obligation has been imposed upon 
it. The fact that the petitioner was all along 
associated with the award-making process does not. 
make it an "aggrieved person" and the present case is 
definitely not a public interest litigation: The Judgment Nurul Islam and Others, .
petitioner is not espousing the cause of a 
downtrodden and deprived section of the community
unable to spend money to establish its fundamental 
rights and enforce its constitutional remedies. It is 
not acting pro bono publico but in the interest of its
members. If the petitioner is refused entry on the 
threshold point, that will not be the end of the world 
for newspaper owners and news organisations. Their 
locus standi as well as means of access to the Courts 
are without doubt assured. 

12. Therefore the real question in this case is,
whether the petitioner has the right to move the writ 
petition in a representative capacity. That is the crux 
of the matter and the High Court Division has in our 
opinion rightly relied upon the. case of Dada Match 
Workers Union Vs, Government of Bangladesh, 29 
DLR 188 in which the question has been answered 
comprehensibly in the negative after considering a 
number of cases from various jurisdictions. It is 
quite clear that the petitioner may represent the be 
employers in the Wage Board and may even have
capacity to act as the employers’ representative in
various other forums but its locus standi to act on
behalf of its members in an application under Article
102 of the Constitution is just not there.

13. The petitioner also cannot challenge the
various provisions of Act No. XXX of 1974, When ‘ 
it has no locus standi to challenge the Wage Board
award it cannot have the locus standi to challenge the
parent Act itself.

14. This is, however, not to say that the
petitioner can never file a writ petition. It can and it
may, if it has a personal interest in the subject.
matter.

15. We, therefore, find no ground for 
interference.
The petition is dismissded.

Ed.

SUPREME COURTY
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Abdul Kader Chowdhury
ATM Afjal J, Mustafa  | ...........Petitioner
Kamal J and Latifur   |
Rahman J. 		    | Vs.
Judgement 		    | Nurul Islam and others..
August 7, 1990. 	    | ......Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Sec. 151 & Or. XLIII r. I(d)

Maintainability of application u/s. 151 CPC for
setting aside an order cancelling an earlier order
dismissing a Miscellaneous Case under Or. IX r. 13.
The effect of an order of dismissal of the 
miscellaneous case for default without any
explanation for the delay, such application could not
be justified.           ....(3-5)

Sultan Ahmed, Advocate, instructed by Md.
Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record - For the
Petitioner.

Not Representant- Respondent.

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 157 of 1990
(From the Judgement and Order dated 15--5-90
passed by the High Court Division, Comilla Sessions,
Comilla, in Civil Revision No. 161 of 1986)

            
            Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: This leave to appeal by
the defendant petitioner is from the revisional
judgement of a Iearned single Judge of the High Court
Division, Dhaka making the Rule absolute and
ne aside an order of the trial Court cancelling its
earlier order dismissing a miscellaneous case under
Order IX, rule 13, CPC and restoring the
miscellaneous case to its file and number,

2. The plaintiff-respondent's ‘suit for
declaration of title was decreed ex parte and the
defendant-peutioner filed a miscellaneous case under
order IX, rule 13, CPC for setting aside the ex parte
decree The said miscellaneous case was also
dismissed for default of the defendant-petitioner on
14.5.86 at 12-30 PM. The defendant-petitioner filed
hajira soon thereafter and submitted that he could not
file hajira in time owing to hartal and prayed for an
adjournment of the case. The prayer for adjournment
was refused on the ground that the miscellaneous
case was already dismissed for default. 7 days
thereafter the defendant-petitioner filed an application
under section 151 CPC for vacating the order
dismissing the miscellaneous case for default and for
restoration of the same. The trial Court having
allowed the same the plaintiff-respondents moved in
revision before the High Court Division which set
aside the impugned order on the ground that an
appeal lies against an order under Order IX, rule 13
CPC rejecting an application for an order to set aside 
the decree passed ex parte. Hence an application
under section 151 is not maintainable.

3. Mr. Sultan Ahmed, learned Counsel for the
defendant-petitioner, submits that the order of the
trial Court dismissing the miscellaneous case for
default is not an order "under Order IX, rule 13, CPC
rejecting an application for‘an order to set aside a
decree passed ex parte" and hence Order 43, rule 1 
had no application.

4. The argument is riot tenable. The effect of
an Order of dismissal of the miscellancous case for
default is one of rejecting an application to set aside
a decree Passed ex parte. It is not an order passed on
merit, but ex parte. Appeal lies in both cases under
order 43, rule 1(d), CPC. The view taken by the
High Court Division is correct. .

5. The defendant-petitioner, therefore, had a
remedy by way of appeal under Order 43, rule 1 (d),
CPC which he did not avail of. This is not to say
that the application under section 151, CPC is
barred under all circumstances, but since the
defendant-petitioner filed the application under
section 151 CPC 7 days after the dismissal of
miscellancous case for default without any
explanation for delay, we do not think that in this
particular case application of section 151 CPC
would have been justified.

6. The petitioner may avail of the remedy of
appeal if he is so advised and if it is still open to
him.

7. The petition is dismissed.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

MH Rahman J, Mustafa | Fazar Ali alias Manik
Kamal J and Latifur  | Chand........... Petitioner
Rahman J. 		   | _. Vs.
Judgment 		   | Fazar Ali and others.......
February 6, 1991.    |. .............-Respondents*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)

Section 417(1)(a) ;
Maintainability of appeal by witness against
order of acquittal—The State u/s. 417(1)(a) of the
Code is authorised to present an appeal,.against an
order of acquittal passed by the Court of Sessions.
But in the present case, the appeal was not preferred
by the State. The appeal was filed before the High
Court Division by a witness who’ is also the
petitioner in the present petition for leave to appeal.
‘Hence this leave petition is not maintainable in
law.              ....(5)

Sultan Ahmad, Advocate, instructed by Md.
Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — ‘For the
Petitioner.

Not represented —R espondends.

*Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 93 of
1990. 
(From the Judgment and Order dated 28th
October, 1990 passed by the High Court Division,
Dhaka in Criminal Revision No. 1126 of 1990.)

            
            Judgment
Latifur Rahman J: A witness has filed this
leave petition challenging the order of acquittal
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka, in
Criminal Revision No. 1126 of 1990 affirming the
judgment of acquittal passed by the Sessions Judge,
Narayanganj in Sessions Case No. 20 of 1990 under
sections 302/201/34 of the Penal Code.

2. In the present case, the First Information
Report was lodged by the wife of deceased Abu Musa
stating, inter alia, that while her deccased husband
visited his land in Jalkuri village the accused-
Opposite partics and others killed him with a sharp
culling weapons and concealed his dead body under
water hyacinth in the WAPDA Canal. On the above
allegations the accused opposite parties were put on
trial.

3. In this case four prosecution witnesses were
examined and the remaining witnesses named in the
charge-sheet were not examined by the prosecution.
The learned Sessions Judge acquitted the Opposite
parties holding that the prosccution failed to prove
the case against the accused persons. On appeal the
Icarned Judges of the High Court Division affirmed
the order of acquittal as the Icarned Judges did not
find any illegality in the judgment of the Icarned
Sessions Judge.

4. Mr. Sultan Ahmad, Icarncd Advocate
‘appearing for the petitioner, submits: that the
acquittal order in the instant case has been affirmed
by the Iearned Judges of the High Court Division
without sccuring the attendance of the witnesses and
consequently the acquittal order suffers from
illegality.’

5. - At the outsct itis to be stated that the State
under section 417(1)(a) ofthe Code of Criminal
Procedure is authorised to present an appcal before
the High Court Division against an order of acquittal
passed by the Court of Sessions. But in the present
case, the appeal was not preferred by the State. It
appears that the appeal against the order of acquittal
was filed before the High Court Division by a
witness named in the charge-shect, namely, Fazar
Ali @ Manik Chand who is also the petitioner
before us. Hence this leave petition is not
maintainable in law. Further, it appears from the
judgment of the High Court Division that the four
witnesses who were examined in the case are close
relations of the deceased and they did not support the
prosecution case, From the judgment of the High
Court Division it also appears that the public
Prosecutor declined to examine any other Witness in
this case. In that view of the Matter, it is also
difficult to say that the order of acquittal was passed
without securing the attendance of Witnesses in the
instant case as argued by the learned Advocate for the
petitioner. 

6. The petition is dismissed.
Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,    | Bangladesh... 
MH Rahman J, ATM  	 | ...........0005. Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J |
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs. 
Judgment 			 | Tobarak Ali Mia ang
August 29, 1990. 		 | others. ...Respondents*

Patni Taluk 
It is a ‘taluk’ created by the Zamindar to be held
at a rent fixed in perpetuity by the lessee and his
heirs for ever, the Patnidar being a tenant. A patni is
not a mere lease-hold property—The patnidar may
let out the lands in any manner conducive to his
interest. “ 7

It was a common practice of the first degree holders of
taluks, who are described as talukdars of the first degree
under the Patni Regulation, to underlet them on precisely
similar terms to the second degree of lessees, known as
darpatni talukdars. They again sometimes similarly underlet
to sepatnidars. The process of sub-letting continued for
several degrees in many instances. In some places there
were as many as a dozen gradations between Zamindars at
the top and the cultivators of the soil at the bottom. By a
process of what is known as sub-infeudation, an almost
interminable series of tenures has been created in the
various Districts of Bengal, particularly in the District of
Bakerganj.

Howla

Howla of Hawala is not materially differeny
from Pattan. It is a tenure, an intermediate holding of


*Civil Appeal No. 10 of 1985. 33

(From the Judgment and order dated 3.11.83
passed by the High Court Division, Comilla Bench in
First Appeal No. 358 of 1968).


            a part of a estate under a Zamindar or Talukdar to
whom a portion of rents collected from Ryots is
paid.                         ..(12)

Bengal Tenancy Act (VIII of 1885)
Ss. 5(1), 52, 61, 86A & 195(e).

Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation (Bengal
Regulation VIII of 1819) 
Section 2

Applicability of the provision of Bengal
Tenancy Act in respect of Patni tenures—A talukdar
holds a tenure under a Zamindar, a darpatnidar under a
talukdar and so on. The same goes for a howladar and
a nimhowladar and so on. The provision of Bengal
Tenancy Act relating to tenures are, prima facie,
applicable ‘to Patni Laws. Bengal Tenancy Act cannot
vary the relative rights of Zamindars and Patni
talukdars as established by Regulation VIII of 1819
but if there are provisions in the Bengal Tenancy Act
which are in the nature of supplementing the
relationship without-being in conflict with the Patni
Laws, the provisions of Bengal Tenancy Act will
apply in respect of Patni tenures.

Section 86A of the Bengal Tenancy Acris in no way
in conflict with the Patni laws nor do the Patni laws
contain any provision similar or analogous to section 86A.
No provision of patni laws is affected by section 86A in
any way. We, therefore, hold that the provisions of section
86A: apply to patni taluks as a supplemental provision of the Patni laws.

Maharaja Ranjit Sinha Vs. Abdul Rahim Khan,
Chowdhury 49 IC 190 & Bata Krishna Rana Vs. Janaki
Nath Panday 18 CWN 916=ILR 41 Cal. 1000 relied.

                                         ........ (16-21)

Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation (Bengal
Regulation VIII of 1819)

Section 14 

Limitation Act (IX of 1908)

Articles 12(d) & 120 |
Lands lost by diluvion—Limitation for talukdar's
Suit for setting aside’ auction sale—A plaintiff
alleging that the lands were lost and ‘no ‘rent was
legally due for the period so lost is not really suing °
the Zamindar for settling the balance due to him. He
is alleging that the very relationship of landlord and
tenant was in’ a state of suspended animation for
some time. It is actually a suit for determining a
cessation ‘and’ resumption of  landlord-tenant
relationship not to be governed by section 4 of the
Patni Regulation under which the relationship is
continuous. The plaintiffs need not file, in such a
position, a suit to set aside the patni sale within the
period of limitation laid down in Art. 12(d) of the
Limitation Act.

The effect of application of section 86A to the
question of limitation is that the sale, which is in its
inception null and void, is legally of no force and therefore
it cannot be set aside, but can only be declared to be void
and Article 12 is inapplicable to such case. A suit to
obtain a declaration in respect of a void sale that it is
inoperative as regards plaintiffs, is not within Article 12.
Article 120 would apply to the suit. .... (22 & 23)

AW Bhuiyan, Additional Attorney-General,
instructed by B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Appellant.

Bahauddin Ahmed, Advocate instructed by Md.
Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent Nos. 1-4, 5(a), 5(a)I to 5(a) VII, 6,9
(Ka) - 9 (cha), 11-12, 13(1) to 13(6).

_ Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 7, 8, 10(a) to 10 |
(c), 14 to 25.

Judgment
Mustafa Kamal J: The defendant-Govern-
ment-appellant contends in this appeal by special
leave that the suit which was decreed by a Division
Bench of the High Court Division, Comilla Bench
in the first appellate jurisdiction upon setting aside
the judgment and decree of the Trial Court
dismissing the suit, is barred by limitation under
Article 12(d), alternatively, under Article 120 of the
First Schedule to the Limitation Act.

2. Facts necessary for the disposal--of the
appeal are that the suit lands are 22.82 acres of char
land at Village* Majichar, known as Underchar at
Noakhali. Plaintiffs, thirteen in number, contended
that late Priyanath Das and others had taken a pattani
howla of the suit land from the Bhulua Zamindars,
owners of 11 annas and 5 annas interest in the same.
Priyanath Das and others sold the entire pattani
howla in 1928 to Fazar Ali and others, predecessors-
in-interest of some plaintiffs and defendant Nos.
2-15. On 20.11.1931 Jatindra Kumar Basu and
Basanta Kumar Basu auction purchased the entire
pattani howla which was put to sale by the Bhulua
Zamindars for arrears of rent. The auction purchasers
took delivery of possession and transferred their

            
            pattani interest to five persons by five kabalas Exts.
2-2(d), all dated Ist Chaitra, 1338 BS. Some of the
plaintiffs are transferees from some of those five
persons and some of the plaintiffs are successors to
the rest. Thus all the plaintiffs combinedly acquired
16 annas interest in the pattani howla. While in
possession on payment of rent the suit lands were
diluviated by the river Meghna in between 1351 BS
to 1353 BS and were reformed in 1361-1362 BS.
The plaintiffs however continued to pay rent for 2/3
years after diluvion and even paid rent for the. first
six months of 1356 BS. They had the reformed lands.
surveyed and demarcated in 1362 BS and went into
possession by constructing huts and grazing cattle.
When the suit lands became fit for cultivation in
1366 BS they started cultivation of paddy therein and
are in continuous possession thereof ever since. The
defendant-Government acquired the interest of the
Bhulua Zamindars in 1951 under the State
Acquisition and Tenancy Act. The plaintiffs went to:
the local Tahsildar in Baisakh, 1368 BS for payment
of rent, but the Tahsildar refused to accept any rent
on the ground that the suit lands were auction sold
and purchased in 1950 for arrears of rent of the last
six months of 1356 BS by the Bhulua Zamindars.
The plaintiffs contended that the sale, if any, was of
no effect as no rent was payable while the suit lands
were completely under water, apparently relying
upon section 86A of the Bengal Tenancy Act. They
also alleged material irregularities in the conduct of
the sale. The plaintiffs prayed for two declarations, |
(a) that they have got absolute pattani howla interest
Or raiyaui interest in the suit land and (b) that the sale
of the pattani howla in 1950 is void, inoperative,
fraudulent, ultra vires and without jurisdiction and
not binding upon the plaintiffs and the suit land.

3. It was the contention of the defendant-
Government as defendant No. 1 that the Bhulua
Zamindars had put to auction sale both the 11 annas
and 5 annas pattani howla for arrears of rent of the
last six months of 1356 BS on 18.5.50 and the sales
were confirmed on 4.7.50. The Zamindars took
delivery of possession. The lands diluviated thereafter
in the last part of 1357 BS and reformed in 1364 BS.
Government is in possession. The auction sale was
held in due conformity with the provisions of the
Patni Regulations. Moreover the principle of
abatement of rent as provided in section 86A of the
Bengal Tenancy Act is not applicable in the case of
Patni Taluk. The suit is barred by limitation.

4. Defendant Nos. 2-15 contended that they
were in possession of 5 annas share of the suit land
in their pattani right on the basis of the Purchase by
their predcecessors-in-interest Fazar Ali and others
from Priyanath Das in 1928. They denied the
auction sale in favour of Jatindra and Basantg on
20.11.1931 and claimed that the said auction
purchasers never possessed the suit land. They also
supported the plaintiffs' case that the auction sale in
1950 was bad. 

5. The trial Court negatived the claim of
defendant Nos. 2-15 to the suit land upon discussion
of evidence on record but dismissed the suit on the
ground that the plaintiffs admitted in their
application dated 1.12.1955 to the District Manager:
Acquired Estate that the pattani had been sold for
non- payment of rent. It held further that there were
no material irregularities in the conduct of the sale. 
The plaintiffs; however, are in possession of the 
lands. There was no finding on limitation, although
an issue was framed thereon. There was also no
finding when the suit lands were: diluviated and
reformed and as to whether section 86A of the
Bengal Tenancy Act was applicable or not.


6. The High Court Division found on the
plaintiffs’ appeal that their application dated
1.12.1955 did not constitute an admission that the
suit lands were diluviated after 1356 BS. It held on.
evidence that the suit lands were under water in 1356
BS. The rent of the pattani lands abated in view of
the provisions of section 86A of the Bengal Tenancy
Act. No rent being due from the pattani holders the
howla could not be sold under section 8 read with
section 11 of Patni Regulation of 1819. As the
auction sale was made illegally it was void and
illegal and did not affect the rights and interests of
the plaintiffs in the suit lands. The High Court
Division confirmed the finding of the trial Court’
that the plaintiffs are in possession of the suit lands
and decreed the suit.

7. The learned Additional Attorney-General,
Counsel for the defendant-Government-appellant,
submits that the provisions of section 86A of the
Bengal Tenancy Act are not applicable to the Patni
Taluks Regulation. He contends that no abatement
of rent being available to the plaintiffs the sale was
only voidable and not void. Article 12(d) of the First
Schedule to.the Limitation Act provides that a suit
to set aside the sale of a patni taluk sold for current 


            
            arrears of rent must be instituted within one year
from the date when the sale would become final and
conclusive had no such suit been brought. The sale
took place on 18.5.50 and was confirmed on 4.7.50,
a patni sale does not need confirmation. It becomes
final and conclusive on payment by the purchaser of
the full amount of the purchase money. Hence the
suit should have been filed within one year from
18.5.50. The suit having been filed on 7.9.1962 is
early barred by limitation. Morcover, Article 120
of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act provides
that a suit for which no period of limitation is
provided elsewhere in the First Schedule must be
instituted within six years from the date when the
right to sue accrucs. On their-own admission the
plaintiffs knew about the auction sale at least on
1.12.55 when they filed an application before the
District Manager, Acquired Estate. They should have
aliernatively filed the suit within 6 years from
1.12.55, but the suit having been filed on 7.9.62 is
also barred under Article 120.

8. The argument has been advanced in a
simplistic manner, so is the reply by the learned
Counsel for the plaintiff-respondents. At the bottom
lie several questions of considcrable importance, not
examined by the Bar at all and unfortunatcly the
judgment of the High Court Division is also cryptic
in nature.

9. The questions are, what bricfly is a patni
taluk or howla and what are the patni laws ? Do the
patni laws contain any provision for sctling aside
sale and does the present suit come within any
special provision of any patni law ? Is section 86A
of the Bengal Tenancy Act applicable to patni laws,
if so why? What effect has the application of section
86A to the question of limitation ? If it applies, docs
the suit become void or voidable ? Is Article 12(d)
applicable to a void or voidable sale ? Finally, is
Article 120 applicable to the suit and if so is the suit
within time under Article 120 ?

10. We shall first have a brief look at the
nature of patni taluk and howla and the patni laws.

11. "The origin of most of the taluks and
Howlas appears to have been a grant of a considerable
tract of waste land upon favourable terms as to rent
to someone who undertook to bring it under
cultivation. The grantee reclaimed portions and
sublet portions to smaller reclaiming tenants, or
perhaps sublet the whole, if he could find tenants to
reclaim it." (Field's "Land Holding and relation of
Landlord and Tenant” quoted by Rohinibinod
Raskshit in The Sun-set Law of Bengal (1939) P.
884). Patni taluk had its origin on the estates of the
Raja of Burdwan but has since been extended to
other Zamindaris. The character of this tenure is that
it is a taluk (etymologically, ‘taluk’ stands for some
intermediate interest being derived from ‘alak' = to
suspend from) created by the Zamindar, to be held at
arent fixed in perpetuity by the lessee and his heirs
for ever. Zamindar is the landlord, patnidar is his
tenant. A patni although in form a lease, is not a
mere Icasc-hold property. A patnidar may It out the
lands in any manner conducive to his interest,
provided his interest was subsisting. It was a
common practice of the first degree holders of
taluks, who are described as talukdars of the first
degree under the Patni Regulation, to underlct them
on preciscly similar terms to the second degree of
lessees, known as darpatni talukdars. They again
sometimes similarly underlct to scpatnidars. The
process of sub-lIetting continucd for scveral degrees
in many instances. In some places there were as
many as a dozen gradations between Zamindars at
the top and the cultivators of the soil at the bottom.
By a process of what is known as sub-infeudation,
an almost interminable scrics of tenures has been
created in the various Districts of Bengal,
particularly in the District of Bakergunge.

12. A Hawala or Howla is not materially
different from Pattan. Prof. Wilson in his Glossary
of Judicial and Revenue Terms (1940) defines
"Howala" thus, "A description of tenure in Eastern
Bengal, an intermediate holding of a part of an
estate, or of a farm under a Zamindar or Talukdar, to
whom a stipulated portion of the rents collected
from the Ryots is paid... Minor divisions
of these holdings are known by the name of
Nim-Hawalas, half farms." (P. 31-7).

13. The Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation,
1819 (Bengal Regulation VIII of 1819), as’
extensively amended by Bengal Act XV of 1940,
contains the main body of Patni laws in this
country. It's 17 sections recognised as valid,
heritable and transferable grant of patni taluks at a
rent fixed for perpetuity by the Zamindars of Bengal.
Patni talukdar's right of underletting was also .
recognised and inferior or derivative tenures were
conferred similar interest to that enjoyed by prior


            
            talukdar, In ease of arenes oF rent pati tenures are
liable to sale by public auction, Tho Regulation
defined the relative rights of Zamindars and paint
tulukdars and established a process for the sale of
such taluks in satistietion of the Zanindar's demand
of rent,

14. Regulation VIL of 1819 contains a special
provision for setting aslde sale, Section 14 provides
that "it shall be competent to any party desirous of
contesting the right of the Zamindar to make the
sale, whether on the geound of there having been no
balance due, or on any other ground, to sue the
Zamindar for the reversal of the same, and, upon
establishing a sufficient plea, to obtain a decree with
full costs and damages.” Tthas been held in Sreemail
Ramsona Chowdhuri Vs. Naba Kumar Singha, 16
CWN 804, that even if an allegation is made that the
arrears, for the recovery of which the sale was held at
the instance of the Zamindar, were not due, the suit
will be governed by section 14 of the Patni
Regulation and Article 12(d) of the First Schedule to
the Limitation Act shall apply to such suits, [t hag
Mlso been held in the case of Bhuban Mohun Maltra
Vs. Girish Narain Moonshl, 13 CLJ 339, that a sale
under the Patni Regulation docs not require
confirmation. It becomes final and conclusive on the
payment by the purchaser to the seller of the full
amount of the purchase moncy. The suit must be
brought within one year from the date of payment of
auction moncy by the purchaser to the seller.

15. Before deciding whether this suit comes
within the provisions of section 14, it is necessary
to decide whether section 86A of the Bengal Tenancy
Act is applicable to patni law, The High Court
Division has answered the question in the affirmative
without giving any reason whatsoever and the
learned Additional Attorney-General has also assailed
this finding without advancing any argument as to
why it is not applicable, *

16. Section 86A of the Bengal Tenancy Act
provides that if the lands of a tenure or holding or a
portion of such lands are lost by diluvion, the rent of
the tenure or holding shall be abated by an amount
which bears the same proportion to the rent of the
whole tenancy, as the arca lost bedrs to that of the
whole tenancy, Section 2 of the Bengal Patni Taluks
Regulation, 1819 clearly recognises taluks held by
talukdars under Zamindars as "tenures", It says, "It is
hereby declared that any leases or engagements for
the fixing of rent now in existence that May have
been granted or concluded for a term of years or in
perpetully by a proprietor under engagements with
the Crown, Or other person competent to grant the
same, shall be deemed good and valid
tenures.....". Section 5(1) of the Bengal
‘Tenancy Act defines "tenure-holder" thus ; "Tenure
holder means primarily a person who has acquired
from a proprietor or from another tenure-holder a
right to hold land for the purpose of collecting rents
or bringing it under cultivation by establishing
tenants on it, and also includes the succegsors.
in-interest of persons who have acquired such a
right." Hence, a talukdar holds a tenure under a
Zamindar, a darpatnidar holds a tenure under a
talukdar and so on, The same goes for a howlader
and a nim-howladar and so on. Prima facie,
therefore, the provisions of the Bengal Tenancy Act
relating to tenures are applicable to Patni Laws,


17. But the following provision of section
195(c) of the Bengal Tenancy Act may be looked
into:

"195, Nothing in this Act shall affect-

(a) ..................................................
(b) ..................................................
(c) ..................................................
(d) ..................................................
(e) any enactment relating to patni-tenures in
so far as it relates to those tenures, except
that—~

(i) the provisions of section 67 and of
clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section
178 ‘shall apply to all patni-tenurcs,
and,

(ii) the expression "Khudkast raiyat of
resident and hereditary cultivator” in
sub-section (3) of section 11 of the
Bengal Patni Taluks Regulation, 1819,
shall be deemed to include all raiyals
having a right of occupancy."


(f) ..................................................

18. Thus, clause (c) simply says that the
Bengal Tenancy Act shall not apply to enactment —
relating to patni-tenures "in so far as they relate to
those tenures”, The legal consequence of this saving
Clause is that with regard to patni-tenures the special
patni law is to apply in the first place and in matters


            
            not covered by the special patni laws i.e. when patni
laws are silent, the provisions of the Bengal Tenancy
Act will apply, simply by way of supplementing the
same, subject to the paramount consideration that
the land must have been Iet out for agricultural
purpose, because if the patni lease was a Iease for
horticultural purposes, it would come within the
preview of the Transfer of Property Act. In so far as
the  relative rights of Zamindars and patni talukdars
are concerned, established by Bengal Regulation VIII
of 1819s the Bengal Tenancy Act cannot vary or alter
the same, but if there are provisions in the Bengal
Tenancy Act which are in the nature of
supplementing the relationship without in any way
peing in conflict with the Patni laws, the provisions
of the Bengal Tenancy Act will apply even in respect
of Patni tenures.

19. Thus section 52-of the Bengal Tenancy
Act provides for alteration of rent where there is
alteration in area. The patni laws do not contain any
such provision. In the case of Maharaja Ranjit Sinha
Vs, Abdul Rahim Khan Chowdhury, 45 IC 190, the
Patnidar filed a suit for abatement of rent. The
Courts below granted the abatement of rent and the Calcutta High Court dismissing the appeal of the
Zamindar observed :

"The learned Judges in the lower Courts
have proceeded under the provisions of scction
52 of the Bengal Tenancy Act and on the ,
principles there defined. Section 52 says that
every tenant shall be entitled to apply. A
patnidar is a tenant and so prima facie he is
entitled to make an application under section 52.
It is said, however, that section 195 of the Act
prevents section 52 from applying to the case of
a patnidar on the ground that clause (ce) of that :
‘section says that nothing contained in the
Bengal Tenancy Act shall affect any enactment
telating to patni-tenures in so far as it relates to
those tenures. Section 52 does not affect any
Cnactment relating to patni-tenures. It is quite
Clear, in my view, that the conclusion arrived at
by the learned District Judge is right."

20. Similarly, under section 61 of the Bengal
Tenancy Act a tenant can deposit rent in Court under 
is entitled to receive it. In Bata Krishna Rana Vs.
Janaki Nath Panday, 18 CWN 916=ILR 41 Cal.
1000, it was observed.
"It is also not seriously contested, and upon
the facts stated it cannot be contested, that in
the events which have happened, the tenant may
entertain a bonafide doubt as to who is entitled
to reccive rent from him. Sec. 61 is,
consequently, prima facie applicable. But
reliance is placed,-on behalf of the defendant,
upon cl, (c) of sec. 195; which provides that
nothing in the Bengal Tenancy Act shall affect
any cnacument relating to putni-tenures in so far
as it rclates to those tenures. The question,
consequently, arises whether sec. 61 docs in any
way affect an cnactment relating to putni
tenures. We invited the Icarned Vakil for the
defendant to specify the particular provision of
Reg. VIII of 1819 which is affected by scc, 61
of the Bengal Tenancy Act, but he was
constrained to admit that he could not point out
any such section. On the other hand, an
examination of the provisions of Reg. VIII of
1819 indicates that there is no scction which
corresponds to sec. 54 of the Bengal Tenancy
Act. If the: Patni Regulation had containcd a
provision as to the time and place for payment
of putni rent, it might have been plausibly
argued that sec. 61 of the Bengal Tenancy Act,
if applied to putni tenures, would affect the
provisions of the Patni Regulation. On these
grounds, we hold that sec. 61 is applicable to a
patnidar and it was open to the plaintiff to
deposit in Court the putni rent in the manner he
did."

21. Section 86A of the Bengal Tenancy Act is
in no way in conflict with the Patni laws nor do the
Patni laws- contain any provision similar or .
analogous to section 86A. No provision of patni
laws is affected by section 86A in any way. We,
therefore, hold that the provisions of section 86A
apply to patni taluks as a supplemental provision of
the Patni laws.

22. Now as to the question whether scction
14 of Patni Regulations applics to this case, it
seems to be fairly clear that when a talukdar wants
to set aside a sale on the ground that the lands were
lost by diluvion, the suit is substantially not one for
determining whether there has been "no balance due"
but whether there was existence of any land at all.
The suits mentioned in section 14 of the Patni
Regulation are indeed suits alleging that "no balance

            
            was due" to the Zamindar or that there was material
irregularity in the conduct of the sale. Such suits arc
to be filed under Article 12(d) within one year from
the date when the purchaser paid the auction money
to the seller. These are voidable sales, not void. But
a plaintiff alleging that the lands were lost and no
rent was legally due for the period so lost is not
really suing the Zamindar for settling the balance due
to him. He is alleging that the very relationship of
landlord and tenant was in a state of suspended
animation for some time. It is actually a suit for
determining a cessation and resumption of
landlord-tenant relationship. In a suit under section

14. the relationship is continuous, because the Patni
Regulation does not contain any provision for
temporary cessation of relationship. It is absolutely
absurd and an affront to common sense to hold that a
talukdar must file a suit to set aside the sale within 1
year under Article 12(d), even when the land in
question remains under water for several years after
the sale and there is no knowing whether the suit
land will ever re-appear and accrue to the plaintiffs’
benefit ever at all. The High Court Division as the,
final Court of fact has given a finding upon
discussion of evidence on record that the suit lands
remained submerged in 1356 BS. We find no reason
to take a different view on facts. The plaintiffs’ suit
was one for a declaration that a void sale was not
binding on them and the suit lands and we hold that
such a declaratory suit is maintainable in respect of a
void patni sale. This suit is not governed by section
14 of Patni Regulation. The plaintiffs need not file a
suit to set aside the patni sale within the period of
limitation laid down in Article 12(d). —

23. The effect of application of section 86A to
the question of limitation is that the sale, which is
in its inception null and void, is legally of no force
and therefore it cannot be set aside, but can only be
declared to be void and Article 12 is inapplicable to
such case. A suit to obtain a declaration in respect of
a void sale that it is inoperative as regards plaintiffs,
is not within Article 12. Article 120 would apply to
the suit.

24. The submission of the learned. Additional
Attomey-General that the plaintiffs should have filed
the suit within 6 years from 1.12.55 is not,tenable
because the commencement of limitation in Article
120 starts from the date “when the right. to sue
accrues”. The plaintiffs were aware of the auction
sale on 1.12.55 but that is not when their right to
sue accrued. Their right to sue accrued when, the
Tahsildar of the Government refused to accept any
rent from them in Baisakh, 1368 BS. The
Government succeeded the Bhulua Estate in 1951
but the plaintiffs were continuously in possession of
the suit land ever since its re-appearance in 1956
Neither the Zamindars nor the Government took
possession of the suit land and there was no
knowing whether the auction sale which took place
in 1950 would be treated as valid or invalid by the
Government. It is only when the functionaries of the
Government unmistakably exercised their Option in
favour of the auction sale that the plaintiffs' right to
sue accrued and they filed the suit within 6 years
thereof under Article 120. If the Government had
clearly intimated to the plaintiffs in 1955 that it
considered the auction sale of 1950 to be valid, then
it could be argued that the plaintiffs’ right to sue 
accrued in 1955.

25. For all the above reasons we find that the
sufit.is not barred by limitation. The only point on
which leave was granted in this appeal fails.

The appeal is dismissed without any order as to

costs.
Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Writ)

shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,  | Muzaffar Ali and another
MH Rahman J and ATM    | .................Appellants
Afzal J. 		     | Vs.
			     | Government of Bangla-
Judgment		     | desh and another...
February 27, 1990,     | .........................Respondents*

enemy Property (Continuance of
Emergency Provision) (Repeal) Act

(XLV of 1974)
Section 3(1)
Circular No. 1A-1/77/156 RL dated
23.5.77
Clause 4(1)
Vested Property—Execution of document in an
Exchange case—After a deed of settlement “was
executed by a competent officer of the Government
whether it could take the plea that the officer haé
acted without its authority—Under the provisions of
Act XLV of 1974 a vested property can be transferred
by the Government or by such officer as. the
Government may direct. The Government having
directed the ADC (Rey.) to take necessary action in
the matter and in view of circulars on the subject,
there is no room for doubt that the ADC was duly
authorised to execute and register the deed of
settlement. The order setting asjde the deed is
therefore without lawful authority. ..........(29)



Rafique-ul-Huq, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, instructed by Miah Abdul Gafur, Advocate-on-
Record— For the Appellants.

AW Bhuiyan, Additional Attorney-General,
instructed by M Nowab Ali, Advocate-on-Record —
For the Respondent Nos. 1-3. |

Abu Bakkar, Advocate-on-Record — For the.
Respondent No.4eio5? cig ag eenkioass Siuel

Kh. Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior Advocate,
Supreme Court, instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondent No. 5.

*Civil Appeal No. 37 0f. 1988...
(From the Judgment and Order dated 9th April,
1987, passed by the High Court Division, in Writ
Petition No. 93 of 1985:)
AD—1Q .Judgment

ATM. Afzal J: This appeal by leave is [rom
Judgment and Order dated 9 April, 1987, passed by a
Division Bench of the High Court Division, Dhaka,
in Writ Petition No, 93 of 1985 discharging the
Rule.

2. The appellants filed the aforesaid writ
petition against respondents Nos. 1-4 challenging
the legality of the Memo No. Da-73/84/202 Acqn.
dated 28,2.85 (Annexure-M to the writ petition)
issued under the signature of respondent No. 3,
setting aside, inter alia, the deed of settlement
(Annexure-G) dated 9.10.79 and declaring further that
the property, Holding No. 7 Wiscghat, shall remain
as vested property under the management and control
of the Government with the present occupant as
lessee/tenant until further orders. The appellants’
case in thé Writ petition was that they are citizens of
Bangladesh having migrated from Murshidabad,
India, in 1964, after exchanging their Indian property
with the aforesaid premises at 7 Wiseghat Road,
Dhaka, which originally belonged to one Akhanda
Kumar Bose alias Ajit Kumar Bose, On his .death
the said property devolved on his son Proedyut
Kumar Bose (Respondent No. 5). In the CS Record,
it was recorded in the name of Akhanda Kumar Bose
and in the SA Record in the name of his son
Proddyut Kumar Bose, son of Ajit Kumar Bose. In
1950 the then Government of East Pakistan
requisitioned the said property of aforesaid Proddyut
Kumar Bose for accommodation of Government
employees. ‘

3. By a deed of exchange executed and
registered on 28.4.64 (Annexure C) the appellants
exchariged their property in Murshidabad with said
Proddyut Kumar Bose for his aforesaid Wiseghat
property in Dhaka, Bangladesh. On 13.2.64
Proddyut Kumar Bose exccuted and registered a
power of attorney (Annexure D) authorising
appellant No. 1, who is the brother of appellant No.
2, to execute and register a deed of exchange in
respect of the said property in favour of the
appellants. The said exchange power of attomey was
revalidated in East Pakistan on 6.6.64.

4. On coming to the then East Pakistan, the
 appellants found that the said Wiseghat property.
under requisition was in the possession of
respondent No. 4 Bulbul Lalit Kala Academy as an
allottee of the Government on a monthly rental. The


            
            appellants applied on 8.9.66 to the Relief
Commissioner, Dhaka, under the provisions of the
Disturbed Persons (Rehabilitation) Ordinance 1964,
for permission for execution and registration of the
deed of exchange in their favour on the basis of the
Power of Attomey executed by said Proddyut Kumar,
But the Relief Commissioner could not grant the
necessary permission as war already broke out
between India and Pakistan on 6 September, 1965;
the Relief Commissioner expressed his inability to
do anything in the matter and asked the appellants to
apply to the Deputy Commissioner, Dhaka, which
they did on 20.1.1967, who in his tum directed them
to apply to the Secretary, Ministry of Land
Administration and Land Reforms, respondent No. 2.
Accordingly in 1972 the appellants filed a petition to
respondent No.2 for execution and registration of the
deed of exchange. Respondent No. 2 by Memo No.
419 XVII-318/73 Exchange dated 13.8.73 (Annexure
E) sent the petition of the appellants to the
Additional Deputy Commissioner (Rev.), Dhaka, for
taking necessary action in the matter.

5. While the matter was pending consideration
by the ADC (Rev.) Dhaka, Memo No. 5177(18) VP
497 dated 29.11.77 (Annexure F) was circulated by
the Ministry of Land Administration and Land
Reforms on the subject of exchange of migrants’
immovable property with bonafide Muslim
refugees/expellees from India authorising the ADC
(Rev.) on behalf of the Government to execute and
register the deed of conveyance. Accordingly the
ADC (Rev.) Dhaka, after consultation with the
Government Pleader, Dhaka, executed on 10.9.79 a
deed of settlement in respect of the said Wiseghat
property in favour of the appellants which was
registered on 20.10.79. The appellants mutated their
names in the revenue records on 17.6.84 and paid
rent to the Government (Annexures H and 1).

6. In April, 1984, the appellants applied to the
ADC (LA) Dhaka for de-requisition and restoration
of possession of the said property. At that time Mr
Amanullah Chowdhury. Secretary, Bulbul Lalit Kala
Academy, filed a petition on 28.2.84 (Annexure J) to
the same office challenging the appellants' deed of
settlement (Annexure G). A’ notice dated 2.5.84
(Annexure K) was issued to the constituted Attorney
of the appellants for a hearing on the matter by the
ADC (LA) on 17.5.84. A hearing took place’on.that
day and the appellants' advocate produced all the
papers and also filed an application (Annexure, 1)
the same date. 

7. The appellants, however, to their suprise
received the memo dated 28.2.85 (Annexure M) by
which the Government set aside the order Passed by
the ADC (Rev.) Dhaka on 9.10.79 in Exchange
Case No. 21/77-78 and the order dated 17.6.84
passed in Misc. Case No. 25/84. It meant that the
deed of settlement in favour of the appellants and the
order mutating their names in respect of the property
in question were set a side. This order dated 28.2.85
had been impugned in the writ petition.

8. Respondent Nos. | and 2 in their affidavit-
in-opposition denied that Akhanda Kumar Bose was
also called by the other name i.e. Ajit Kumar Bose
It was stated that the disputed property was
requisitioned in 1974 for the accommodation of
Intelligence Branch Office and, thereafter, it was
allotted in favour of respondent No. 4 in 1955 on a
monthly rent of Tk. 300/-. Proddyut Kumar Bose
filed a written objection on 7.4.80 to the ADC
(Rev.), Dhaka, challenging the genuineness of the
deed of exchange (Annexure C) and denying the
execution thereof. It was stated that on consideration
of the petition dated 9.12.84 filed by respondent No.
4 to the President and Chief Martial Law
Administrator and the petition filed by the appellants
on 10.10.84, the respondents set aside the order of
settlement of the disputed property by the impugned
order on the grounds mentioned therein which will
speak for itself.

9. In their affidavit-in-reply the appellants,
inter alia, stated that Proddyut Kumar Bose did not
pursue his objection and it was ultimately rejected
on 28.3.83 for non-prosecution.

10. Respondent No. 4 also filed an affidavit
in-opposition alleging mainly that the disputed
property was a Debottar Property, that the name of
Akhanda Kumar Bose was recorded as Shebayet
the C.S. Khatian, that on his death his son Proddyut
Kumar Bose continued as the Shebayet (trustee), that
he is a citizen of Bangladesh by birth and has been
living here, that the alleged deed of exchange and the
power of attorney purported to have been executed
by Proddyut-Kumar-Bose were fraudulent and not
genuine and that the deed of settlement in favour’ of
the appellants was rightly set aside.

11. The appellants by filing affidavit-in-reply

            
            the assertions made by respondent No.4 and
annexed an affidavit dated 13.10.80 by Proddyut
Kumar Bose in which he admitted the genuineness of
the power of Attorney and the exchange deed.


12. ‘Respondent No. 5, Proddyut Kumar Bose
was added as respondent in the writ petition on his
application. He in his affidavit-in-opposition also
stated that his father's name is Akhanda Kumar Bose
and he had no alias as Ajit Kumar Bose. He denied
the deed of exchange and the power of attorney said
to be executed by him and maintained that the
disputed property was neither an enemy property nor
a vested property. On 31.1.75 he entered into an
agreement with respondent No. 4 for sale of the
disputed property and received Tk. 3,85,000/-. He
disputed the authority of the ADC (Rev.) to grant
settlement of the property in question to the

13. By filing another affidavit-in-reply, the
appellants denied the assertions made by respondent
No. 5.

14. .On behalf of the appellants it was argued
before the High Court Division that the deed of
settlement having been executed by the ADC (Rev.),
Dhaka, in exercise of powers conferred by the
Government by Memo dated 29.11.77 (Annexure F)
and the said settlement having been confirmed by
mutation of the name of the appellants in the records
of the Government and by realising rent, the
appellants acquired a vested right in the disputed
property and it could not be taken away by the
Government because there was no authority Icft in
the Government to defeat the right of the appellants
by retracting the steps already taken. The Icarned
Judges, however, disagreed with the submission and
referred to clause 12 of the deed of settlement which
Provides as follows: a

"12. It shall be lawful for the lessor, at
any time during the period of lease to determine
the ease by a written notice in case any fraud on
the part of the lessee is detected or the deed of
exchange is found fraudulent and the lessee shall
have no right or title to the lease hold
Properties,"

15. It was then observed that the settlement
could have been determined on the above ground
following the procedure laid down in aforesaid clause
12 but the respondent Nos..1.and 2'did not act in
terms of the said clause.’ Without expressing any
opinion on the disputed facts as to whether Proddyut
Kumar Bose had at all exchanged the disputed
property with the appellants and executed the power
of attorney in their favour as alleged, etc., the
learned Judges went on to observe that the
Government could not avoid a valid settlement of
any vested property without following the procedure
for determination of the lease provided for in the deed
of settlement itself.

16. Having already and clearly found that the
procedure in the instant case was not followed in
terms of the said clause 12, one expected that the
impugned order would be ‘struck down on that
ground. But the learned Judges went on to consider
whether the Additional Deputy Commissioner
(Rev.), Dhaka, had the authority to grant the
settlement on 9.10.79 on the assumption that the
disputed property was a vested property at the time
of settlement. The Iearned Judges, upon referring to
the up-to-date Iegal position as to vested property
and the various circulars issued by the Ministry of
Land Administration and Land Reforms from time to
time, took the view that the ADC (Rev.) has not
been given by Memo No. 5177(18) VP 497 dated
29.11.77 (Annexure F) the power to transfer or
dispose of the exchange properties (now vested in
the Government) without prior clearance from the
Government which is now the requirement of
section 3(1)(a) of the Enemy Property (Continuance
of Emergency Provisions) (Repeal) Act 1974 (Act
XLV of 1974) read with clause 4(1) of the Circular
No. 1A-1/77/156 RL dated 23.5.77. Accordingly, it
was held that the settlement made by the ADC (Rev.)
Dhaka, on 9.10.79 in favour of the appellants was
without Jurisdiction and void ab initio. Upon such
view of the matter the learned Judges found no
reason to interfere with the impugned Order and the
Rule was accordingly discharged.

17. Leave was granted to consider whether the
aforesaid view taken by the High Court Division
was legally correct or not.

18. Mr. Rafique-ul-Hugq, learned Counsel for
the appellants, submitted that the learned Judges of
the High Court Division fell into an error in not
keeping in view the historical background that the
disputed property was not an usual vested property
‘simpliciter but it was subject to an agreement for
exchange which took place long before the property

            
            became enemy or vested property under the law and
that the Government, since 1968, have been dealing
with these cases by issuing necessary instructions
for regularising such cases of exchange of migrants’
immovable property with bonafide Muslim
refugees/expellecs from India, The learned Counsel
has referred to various circulars on the subject
beginning from No. 1578 Gnl. dated 15.11.68 till
date which are to be found in Chapter IX under the
heading "Exchange Case" of the Land Administration
Manual, published by Land Administration Board
(Ministry of Land) on 1st. December, 1987. Relying
upon the said circulars particularly the one dated
29.11.77 (Annexure-F), in terms of which the deed
of settlement was executed, Mr Huq submitted that
the ADC was perfectly competent to transfer the
Property and execute the necessary document on
behalf of the Government. Mr Huq also submitted
that even if prior approval of the Government was
necessary, as held by the High Court Division, the
same must be presumed in the present case inasmuch
as it was the Government.to whom the appellants
had applied and the Government sent the case to the
ADC (Rev.) Dhaka, for taking necessary action in
the matter by its Memo dated 13.8.73 (Annexure E).
The Iearned Counsel further submitted that the deed
of settlement having been executed by a competent
officer of the Government under its authority and the
same having been acted upon by acceptance of rent
and mutation of the appellants’ name in the revenue
record, the Government could no longer take the plea
.that its officer had acted without its authority. In
Support of his submission, he cited 1984 All
England Law Reports (Vol. Il) 767; 27 DLR 315
and PLD 1969 (SC) 407.

19. The learned Deputy Attorney-General
appearing for respondents Nos. 1, 2 and 3 supported
the view taken by the High Court Division. The
learned Counsel for respondents 4 and 5 while
supporting the impugned Government order and the
decision of the High Court Division, contended that
the alleged deed of exchange and power of attorney
were all false and fraudulent documents as Proddyut
Kumar Bosc had all along been living in the then
East Pakistan and then in Bangladesh and continuing
as the owner of the disputed property.

20. It may be observed that from the Position
taken by respondent Nos. 4 and 5 before the
authorities and in this proceeding it follows that the -
property in question did not vest in the Government
at any time cither as enemy or vested property
because Proddyut Kumar Bose according to them
had been living in this country all along. The
question whether the property is a vested property or
not has not been an issue in this proceeding and we
must proceed on the assumption that the property is
a vested property (and claimed by the appellants as
exchange property) as will appear from the
impugned order of the Government itself(Annexure
M). Respondent Nos. 4 and 5, it is significant, have
not raised any objection to this order nor do they
object to the findings made by the High Court
Division.

21. From the facts of the case as disclosed in
the affidavits and annexures of the parties filed before
the High Court Division, it appears apparently that
Proddyut Kumar Bosc, respondent No, 5, is a
double-dealer, sometimes sailing with the appellants
and sometimes with respondent No. 4 According to 
his own convenience. We shall see and say
something more later on, but we should not be
understood to have made any comment with regard
to the genuineness or otherwise of the documents of |the appellants or as to the claims made by the
contending parties other than the Government. The
High Court Division rightly refrained from making
any findings of fact on contentious matters and
proceeded to enquire only the legality of the order
impugned,

22. The respondents have not disputed before
us the findings made by the High Court Division |
that the Government without following the
procedure as laid down in clause 12 of the deed of ©
settlement had cancelled the same which it could not
do. The High Court Division, however, refused to
interfere with the impugned order holding that the
deed of settlement was itself unauthorised because
the ADC (Rev.) had not taken prior approval of the
Government before executing the deed. We shall
confine ourselves to the examination of this
Proposition upon which the High Court Division
refused to interfere in the matter.

23. The exposition of the law relating to
enemy and then vested property as given in the
impugned judgment of the High Court Division is
correct and no exception can be taken to the same
The Enemy Property (Continuance of Emergency
Provisions) (Repeal) Act 1974 (Act XLV of 1974)


            
            being amended by the Enemy Property
(Continuance of Emergency Provisions) (Repeal)
(Amendment) Ordinance 1976 (Ordinance No. XCIII
of 1976) by the relevant clause of section 3 provides
that all enemy property vested in the custodian of
enemy property appointed under the provisions of
the Defenece of Pakistan Rules and continued in force
by the Ordinance (1 of 1969) shall vest in the
Government and shall be administered, controlled,
managed and disposed of by transfer or otherwise by
the government or by such officer or authority as the
Government may direct. Circular dated 23rd May,
1977 (Page 554 of the Manual), of the Ministry of
Land Administration and Land Reforms Division
containing instruction ‘for administration,
management and disposal of vested property by
clause 4(1), provides that the ADC(Rev.) may, with.
the previous approval of the Government transfer or
otherwise dispose of any vested property cither by
himself or through the Sub-divisional Officer in
whose jurisdiction the property is situated. These are
the provisions upon which the High Court Division
put reliance.

24. It will be seea that from long time before,
the problem of regularisation of genuine exchanges
of immovable properties madc by the refugecs/
expellees from India with those of Hindu migrants
from the then East Pakistan engaged the attention of
the Government and instructions were being given
from time to time to subordinate agencics in that
behalf with the change of Iegal position due to
supervening circumstances affecting such property.

25. Inthe present case the Disturbed Persons
(Rehabilitation) Ordinance, 1964, was in force when
the alleged exchange took place between the
appellants and respondent No. 5 The appellants
applied to the Relief Commissioner under section 6
of the said ordinance for permission to execute the
necessary document of title in respect of the
Property, But before anything was done, following
Outbreak of war between India and Pakistan, the
Character of the property changed and it became |
enemy property. upon promulgation of the. Defence
of Pakistan Ordinance. and the Rules. The then
Government of East Pakistan by its memo dated 15 -
November, 1968 (page 610 of the Manual),
considered the question of regularising the
possession of the, Muslim refugees and expellees
from India on the immovable properties of Hindu
migrants taken in exchange for their Indian
properties without proper or Legally enforceable
documents of title. It provided that only the case of
exchange prior to 6th. September, 1965, should be
considered for regularisation. All cases of exchange
made before that date were to be divided into two
categories. The appellants’ case falls in the first
category and was to be dealt with by the Deputy
Custodian of Enemy Property (Land and Buildings).
The Deputy Custodian was to give effect to the
exchange by excculing necessary deed of transfer in
favour of the refugees/expellees concerned on behalf
of the migrant if he found the case of exchange to be
genuine. Government Memo dated 29.11.73 (page
617 of the Manual) referred to the instructions
contained. in the Memo dated 15th November, 1968
and’ 23.12.69 and went on to say that in both the
catcgorics the Deputy Commissioner was to reccive
application for regularisation of exchanges. In the
first category of cases (in which the appellants’ case
falls) when the Deputy Commissioner was satisfied
about the genuincness of the exchange, he would
furnish a certificate to that effect and the Assistant
Custodian (L & B) would, on the basis of such
certificate of genuineness, give effect to the
exchange by execution of necessary deed of transfer
in favour of the refugee/expellee concerned on behalf
of the migrant. It provided that in either case no
consideration moncy other than annual land revenue
should be charged for such transfer or settlement. A
power of review wds also given to the Deputy
Commissioner which is not relevant for our present
purpose. Another Memo dated 30.7.87 (at page 625
of the Manual) shows that’ the Government once
decided that the regularisation of exchange cascs
should be referred to the Civil Court but by the said
Memo again entrusted the power of registration to
the Deputy Commissioners and Additional Deputy
Commissioners (Rev.). In the same line another
Memo dated 29.11.77 (Annexure-F) was issued
which is very important for the present purpose and
“on the basis of which the deed of settlement was
executed by the ADC(Rev.). It will be seen that
while issuing the said Memo the government was
well aware of Act XLV of 1974 and the earlier
instructions issued by the Government in respect of
exchange cases of which the property subsequently
became vested in the Government. It provided that
all cases of exchange made before 6.9.65 would now
form a single category and since the properties have



            
            already vested in the government, there is also no
question of execution and registration of a sale deed
by the Additional Deputy Commissioner on behalf
of the migrant Hindu. Such deed should be executed
and registered on behalf of the Government by the
Additional Deputy Commissioner (Rev.).

26. Reading all these circulars together and
keeping in view the Government policy in respect of
regularisation of the exchange cases taking place
prior to the war of 1965, it is found that these cases
formed a class by themselves and the property
involved in such cases could not be equated with any
other ordinary vested property. The instructions of
the Government in respect of such property were
always specific and indeed they have been separately
treated and put in Chapter IX of the Land
Administration Manual under the heading “Exchange
Cases". The Memo. dated 23rd May, 1977, upon
which the High Court Division relied will be found
in Chapter VIII of the Manual under the heading
‘management of the vested property’. In determining
the validity of the deed of settlement in the present
case, therefore, all the circulars beginning from
15.11.68 relating to Exchange cases are relevant and
it could not be said in view of Annexure F in
particular that the ADC (Rev.) ‘in the absence of
prior approval as required under circular dated 23rd
May, 1977, had no authority to execute the
document in question on behalf of the Government.

27. Ona reference to the impugned order dated
28.2.85 (Annexure M) which set aside the settlement
made by the ADC on 10.9.79, the following
grounds are found in support of the order:

"i) The property was not exchanged by the real
and recorded owner.

ii) DC or ADC had no authority to entertain
any prayer for regularisation of exchange
case after 30.9.70 vide GO No. 879(19)
Genl. dated 1.7.70,

iii) No reason or ground was given by the
exchanger Mozaffar Ali and others as to
why they applied to ADC on 1.4.78 i.e.
after 18 years, when they had claimed that
their property in India was exchanged and
given by registered deed to Ajit Kumar Bose
on 13.2.64. ,

‘ iv) GO No. 5177 (18) 7/497/77 dated 29.11.77
did not give the ADC (Rev.) any authority
to register any property on the basis of
exchange decd.as the said Property had by
that time, vested in the Government as
vested property.” 

28. The High Court Division in its judgement
by its finding as to failure of the Government to
follow clause 12 of the deed of settlement impliedly
negatived ground Nos. 1 and III above. As to ground
No. II, the High Court Division observed that it was
absolutely preposterous to claim that by circular
dated 1.7.70. the Deputy Commissioners or the
Additional Deputy Commissioners Ceased to have
any authority to entertain any prayer for
regularisation of exchange cases after 30.9.79 and
this was a sheer misreading of the circular dated
1.7.70 on the part of the Government respondents, it
has already been pointed out that the respondents
have not objected to the said findings. As to round
No. IV, we need only point out that the Memo dated
29.11.77 was not properly perceived by the
authority which passed the impugned order dated
28.2.85. In the said Memo nowhere it has been said
that the ADC will not have any authority to register
any property because it. became vested in the
Government. On the other hand, the said memo
shows that the Government being quite cognizant of
the fact that the relevant properties have become
vested in the Government under the Vested Property
Laws, authorised the ADC's to execute and register
the necessary document on behalf of the
Government. Therefore, it is clear that none of the
grounds enumerated in the impugned order of the
Government is capable of Sustaining the said order.

29. Upon a close scrutiny of the matter it is
found that the alleged absence of prior approval of
the Government cannot be pressed into service for
invalidating the order of settlement. The
Government itself does not say, it is pertinent to
observe, that the settlement was bad because the
ADC did not take its prior approval. The High
Court Division, therefore, was not justified in
supplying a ground which never occurred to the
Government. It has been noticed that under the
Provisions of section 3 of Act XLV of 1974, a
vested property can be transferred by the Government
or by such officer or authority as the Government
may direct. In the present case it is clear from
Annexure E that it is the Government which directed
the ADC (Rev.) to take necessary action in the

            
            matter. The Memo dated 13.8.73 read with Annexure
F along with all other circulars on this subject Ieave
no room for doubt that the ADC (Rev.) was properly
and duty authorised under the law by the Government
to execute and register the deed of settlement on
behalf of the Government. Therefore, the alleged
absence of prior approval of the Government seems
to be absent in the present case in any case.

30. It falls to be observed that in cases of
dispute over execution of document in Exchange
case the Government in its memo dated 29.11.73
provided that if anybody was aggrieved by any order
of the Deputy Commissioner, he could go to the
civil Court for redress: The memo dated 23.11.85
page 623) also says that there is no bar for going to
the Civil Court for declaration and establishment of
title on the basis of exchange, agreement or other
claim. It is pertinent to observe that Proddyut Kumar
Bose admittedly filed an application before the ADC
(Rev.) for cancellation of the document on 7.4.80.
He in his affidavit-in- opposition said that he entered
into an agreement for sale of the property in question
to Bulbul Academy of Fine Arts on 31.1.75 for
consideration and had received Tk. 3,85,000/- more
out of the fixed price after the bainapatra was
executcd. It is interesting, however, that he gave his
address as resident of Nandalal Dutta Lance, Dhaka, at
present of 7, Wiseghat, Dhaka. Be that as it may,
the order sheet of the ADC (Rev.) Dhaka, in
Exchange Case No. 21/77-78 (Annexure T to the
affidavit-in-reply by the appellants at page 286)
shows that respondent No. 4 Bulbul Lalit Kala
Academy also raised objection to the deed of
settlement besides respondent No. 5. From the last
order dated 28.3.83 it appears that’ several
adjournments were taken by respondent No. 5 and
yet he did not finally appear at the hearing. The
ADC rejected the objection petition observing that
the aggrieved party may take shelter in the
competent, Civil Court, if they so desire. It'does not
appears that either respondent No. 4 or respondent
No. 5 Went to the Civil Court which would. have
been in consonance with the aforesaid order and the:
Government Policy, Instead the respondent No.. 4
trying to make a Short. circuit approached. the;
President & CMLA consequent upon,-which the:
impugned Order was. passed. Respondent No. 5
seemed to have gone into hibernation since 1983.
only, surface again during the proceedings in- writ
in 1987 attention has been drawn to.an affidavit.
sworn by Pronob Kumar Bosc, son of Proddyut
Kumar Bose of Jorogram, Midnapur, filed by the
appellants (Annexure-S at page 281-283), in which
he stated that the deed of exchange was properly and
legally executed by his father at Howrah in 1964,
that the objection petition dated 7.4.80 was filed by
his father under pressure, threat and duress and for
the safety of his life and that he and his father
permanently reside in India. The affidavit of
Proddyut himself admitting the exchange (Annexure
p, page 207-210) has already been noticed. Thus the
facts disclosed in this case. are highly disputed and in
the fitness of things, the parties should have becn
directed to the. Civil Court instead of -the
Government taking upon itself the onerous task of
resolving a complicated civil dispute after exccution
of the document of settlement in favour of the
appellants in terms of its own policy and
instructions given to its subordinate officers.

31. In view of the discussion above, it-is
found that the vicw taken by the High Court
Division that the ADC could not'make the transfer
in question without the prior: approval of the
Government and as such the settlement made by him
on 9.10.79 in favour.of the appellants was void and
without jurisdiction cannot'be sustained and that it
ought to have declared that the impugned
Government order was passed without lawful
authority.

32. In the result, therefore, this appeal is
allowed without any order as to cost and it is hereby
declared that the order dated 28.2.85 (Annexure M)
has been passed without lawful authority and is of
no legal effect.

Ed.

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

MH Rahman J, ATM         | Bangladesh... Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | 
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
Judgment 			 | Md. Fazlul Huq...........
November 27, 1990. 	 | ................Respondent*

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 135

A postal clerk asked to act as an Inspector on
purely temporary basis was reverted’ to — his
substantive post after about five years’ service—
Whether this reversion amounts to reduction in
rank—The uninterrupted service rendered by the
respondent-employee for about five years even if
considered as "non-temporary or quasi-permanent"
cannot be termed reduction in rank to attract
constitutional protection. The relevant order indicates
that it was never meant to be an order of promotion.
In the facts of the case the respondent. was not
entitled to any show cause notice nor was there any
Violation of the principle of natural justice. His
contention that he has acquired a vested right in the
post of Inspector must fail.

Anwarul Huq Khan Vs. Govt, of Bangladesh & ors.’
31 DLR 21; Govt. of Bangladesh Vs. Md. Ismail Hossain
31 DLR (AD) 127; Hartwell Prescott Singh Vs. The Uttar
Pradesh Govt. & ors. AIR 1953 (SC) 886; Parshotam Lal
Dhingra Vs. Union of India PLD 1958 (SC) 217; Abdul
Majid Sheikh Vs. Mushaffe Ahmed & another 17 DLR
(SC) 63; Chairman, Railway Board Vs, Abdul Majid 18
DLR (SC) 532; State of Bombay Vs. FA Abraham AIR
1962 (SC) 794; PLD 1959 (SC) 82; Province of West
Pakistan Vs. Bashir Ahmed PLD 1959 (SC) 93; Pakistan
& another Vs. Quazi Syed Hikmat Hussain PLD 1959 (SC)
107; 18 DLR (SC) 532; 17 DLR (SC) 63; 22 DLR (SC)
331; 36 DLR (AD) 26 discussed.
                            ........... (7, 9, 12-16, 22-25 & 30-32)

AW Bhuiyan, Additional Attorney-General,
instructed by B Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Appellant

Rafiqur Rahman, Sr. Advocate, instructed by
Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondent.

*Civil Appeal No. 25 of 1988.

(From the judgment and order dated 25
November, 1986 passed by the High Court Division,
Dhaka in Civil Revision No. 71 of 1981).

Judgment 

MH Rahman: J: Respondent, Md. Fazlul
Huq, was appointed as a clerk in the postal
department of the Government in November, 1965
Subsequently by an order dated 3.5.1972 he was
asked to act as Inspector of Post Offices, (hereinafter
in brief IPO), at Netrokona Subdivision.

2. The order dated 3.5.1972 by which the
plaintiff was asked to act as IPO was "issued in the
interest of service to have immediate effect and until
further orders." The order reads as follows:

"Mr. Fazlul Huq., Clerk Divisional Office
Mymensingh is hereby ordered to act as
Inspector of Post Offices, Netrokona Sub-Dn
vice. Mr, Saifuddin Ahmed transferred on

_ Promotion as Assistant Supdt. of Post Offices |
Mymensingh. Mr. Fazlul will make over charge
of his branch on the fore-noon of 1-5-72, He jg
clearly given to understand that his appointmen
is purcly temporary and may be terminated at
any time without any previous notice and
showing any reason".

3. -By order dated 26th Junc, 1976 the —
respondent was reverted to his substantive post. and
was asked to join in Mymensingh Office.

4. Respondent instituted OC Suit No, 253 of
1976 in the Court of Munsif, Netrokona for a
declaration that the aforesaid order dated 26th June,
1976 was illegal and void.

5. The appellant contested that suit asserting,
inter alia, that the plaintiff was ordered to act as an
IPO, Netrokona in the vacancy caused. by Mr.
Saifuddin Ahmed on temporary basis due to
non-availability of qualified hand; that every IPO is
requircd to qualify through competitive examination.
and that the plaintiff appeared in the competitive
examination, but failed.

6. ‘The trial Court dismissed the suit. It held
that no clerk could be promoted to the cadre of IPO
without passing a competitive examination as
provided in Rules 297/1 of Post and Telegraphs
Manual Volume IV. The trial Court considered the
gradation list of Postal Officers corrected upto
1.7.1959 that showed that ten unqualified IPOs were
declared to be absorbed in the cadre, but as no
evidence was led how the ten IPOs were absorbed it
held that the plaintiff could not claim to be absorbed
as an IPO without having the requisite qualifications


            
            7. On appeal the plaintiff's prayer for declaring
the order of transfer as bad was rejected, but his
other prayer with regard to the reversion to this post
of clerk was allowed. After considering rule 50 of the
posts and Telegraphs Manual Volume IV which
provides the vacancies from non-gazetted officers of
more than one month but not more than four
months duration can be filled up temporarily, and
rule 59 which provides that an IPO should not
ordinarily remain in charge of the same division or at
the same post for more than four years at a time, the
appellate Court observed that the plaintiff held the
post of IPO for more than four years and he was
under the impression that he would be ultimately
absorbed in the cadre of IPO. As the impugned order
was passed without any notice the appellate Court
after relying on Anwarul Hug Khan Ys. Government
of Bangladesh and others 31 DLR 21 and the
Gorernment of Bangladesh Vs. Md. Ismail Hossain,
31 DLR (AD) 127 declared that the order of reversion
amounted to reduction in rank and it was void and
illegal. The High Court Division upheld the order of
the appellate court.

8. In 31 DER .21 it was held that an
incumbent holding a post for considerable long time
is entitled to protection under Article 135 of the
Constitution.

9. In the Government of Bangladesh Ys. Md.
Ismail Hossain reported in 31 DLR (AD) 127 the
respondent, holding substantively the post: of
District Kanungo, was “appointed temporarily to the
East Pakistan Civil Service (Executive) Class II", a
temporary cadre dependent on early sanction. After
seven years of service in that cadre he was reverted to
his Substantive post of District Kanungo without
any notice. It was held that as the respondent was
not appointed for a limited period within the tenure
of cadre or any specified period and that as the
word temporarily used in the order of appointment
would mean the cadre itself and not relate to the
appointed, his reversion to his substantive post
was treated as a reduction in rank. With this
reasoning the court distinguished the ratio. in
Hartwell Prescott Singh Vs. The Uttar Pradesh
Government and others AIR 1953 (SC) 886,
Parshotam Lal. Dhingra Vs. Union of India. PLD
1958 SC (India) 217, Abdul Majid Sheikh Vs.
Mushffe Ahmed and another 17 DLR 1965 (SC).
63, and Chairman Railway Board Vs. Abdul Majid

10. In the case reported in AIR 1957 (SC)
886 it was held "Reversion from a temporary post
held by a person does not per se amount to reduction
in rank because the temporary post held by him is
not his substantive rank."

11. In the case reported in PLD 1958 (SC)
India 217 the Indian Supreme Court held” [If] the
servant has no right to the post, as where he is
appointed to a post, permanent or temporary either
on probation or on an officiating basis and whose
temporary service has not ripened into a quasi-
permanent service as defined in the Temporary
Service Rules, the termination of his employment
does not deprive him of any right and cannot,
therefore, by itself be a punishment. One test for
determining whether the termination of the service
of a Government servant is by way of punishment is
to ascertain whether the servant, but for such
termination, had the right to hold the post. If he had
a right to the post as in the three cases hereinbefore
mentioned, the termination of his service will by
itself be a punishment and he will be entitled to the
protection of Art. 311. ... To put it in another
way, if the Government has, by contract, express or
implied, or under the rules, the right to terminate the
employment at any time, then such termination in
the manner provided by the contract or the rules is
prima facie and per se, not a punishment and does ~
not attract the provisions of Art. 311."

12. In State of Bombay Vs. FA Abraham
AIR 1962 (SC) 794 the Indian Supreme Court held
that "a person officiating in a post has no right to
hold it for all times. He may have been given the
officiating post because the permanent incumbent
was not available, having gone on leave or being
away for some other reasons. When the permanent
incumbent comes back, the person officiating is
naturally reverted to his original post. This is no
reduction in rank for it was the very term on which
he had been given the officiating post. Again,
sometimes a person is given an officiating post to
test his suitability to be made permanent in it later. .
Here again, it is an implied term of the officiating ,
appointment that if he is found unsuitable; he would
have to go back. If, therefore, the appropriate
authorities find him unsuitable for the higher rank
and then revert him back to his original lower rank;
the action taken is in accordance with the terms on

            
            which the officiating post had been given. It is in no
way a punishment and is not, therefore, a reduction
in rank."

13. The Pakistan Supreme Court consistently
held in a number of decisions that reversion of an
incumbent to his substantive post from the higher
post to which he was temporarily promoted is not a
reduction in rank: Pakistan Vs. Fazal Rahman
Khundkar and another PLD 1959 (SC) 82, Province
of West Pakistan Vs. Bashir Ahmed, PLD 1959
(SC) 93 and Pakistan and another Vs. Quazi Syed
Hikmat Hussain PLD 1959 (SC) 107.

14. In the case reported in 18 DLR 1966 (SC)
532, Chairman, East Pakistan Railway Board,
Chittagong and another Vs. Abdul Majid Sardar,
Ticket Collector, PE Railway, the Pakistan Supreme
upheld the reversion of the respondent to his
substantive post of Tally Clerk from that of a Ticket
Collector to which he was temporarily promoted.

15. The respondent however relied on 17 DLR
(SC) 63 and 22 DLR (SC) 331 and submitted that |
his case is not a case of reversion simpliciter.

16. In Khushi Muhammad & others Ys.
General Manager (now Vice-Chairman), Pakistan
Western Railway 22 DLR (SC) 331 as no rule was
shown to the court that an incumbent holding a post
in the grade in a temporary or officiating capacity
‘should rank lower in point of seniority to one who
was appointed later in the service in the same
capacity against a reserved post in the same category
it was held that all the incumbents were to be treated
at par in the matter of seniority in the grade after

they entered it. This case has no relevance in the
case,

17. For the meaning of the term "until further
order” our attention has been drawn to the following
observation of Cornelius, CJ in Abdul Majid. Vs.
Mushafee Ahmed, Section Officer, Government of
Pakistan and others 17 DLR SC 63 (68) .

"It is clearly impossible to construe: the
expression “until further orders" as conferring
absolute power of retention or dismissal upon
the competent authority. The matter of public
employment is governed by a complex of laws,
commencing with constitutional instruments
and ending with statutory rules, which have
been authoritatively construed, by the Superior
Courts, in relevant respects. Therefore, these
words can only mean that the appointee was
subject to lawful orders made by competent
authority.”

18. Our attention is also drawn to the
following observation of Kaikaus J made in 17 DLR
(SC) 63 (74):

"To repeat, the Government could not as an
ordinary and permanent arrangement fill
permanent posts by employees subject to a
condition of termination of employment by
notice. The Government could fill the post in
this manner if the Government was unable to
get a person with proper qualifications and was
filling the post as interim measure till it secured
a person with proper qualifications, and
conceivably in some other  spceial
circumstances, for some time but it cannot
adopt it as a rule that the post will be filed in |
this manner. When I ask myself the question as
to why the Government is filling a permanent
post in this manner I find no answer except that
the Government wants to retain a power of
arbitrary termination of service so as to defeat
the constitutional guarantee. No condition of
service that is intended to defeat a constitutional
guarantee can be permitted to be operative."

19. In this case we find no reason to ascribe
any bad motive to the appointing authority.

20. The above observations of Cornelius, CJ
and Kaikaus, J., made in a case of termination of
service with fourteen days' notice are hardly relevant
in this case where there is no question of
termination of service.

21. The only question which calls for
determination in this case whether the impugned
reversion to the respondent's substantive post after
his acting in a higher post can be termed as
reduction in rank,

22. The case reported in 31 DLR (AD) 127,
relied on by the appellate Court as well as by the
High Court Division, come up for consideration in
Saleh Ahmed Joardar Vs. People's Republic of 
Bangladesh 36 DLR (AD) 26. After finding that the
case of Saleh Ahmed and that of Ismail Hossain of
31 DLR (AD) 127, being both a case of ‘reversion
to substantive post, "substantially the same", Fazle
Munim, CJ in delivering the majority opinion held
"Yet, a different conclusion must be reached by us in


            
            case at hand”.
23. After considering an unreported case of the
Pakistan supreme Court where a petition for special
leave to appeal by one Kudrutullah challenging an
order of reversion from a temporary appointment to a
higher post to the incumbent's substantive post was
dismissed in limine, Fazle Munim CJ observed at
para 17 of the report:
"We have, therefore, before us two sets of
views by two of the highest tribunals of the two
countries which are opposed to each other in
respect of an interpretation relating to the
expression "temporarily" used in the same order
of appointment covering those cases and the
present one for consideration before us. In
Kudratulla's case the Supreme Court of Pakistan
appears to prefer the plain meaning of the
expression "temporarily" and therefore, refused
to hold the appointment as permanent. Whereas
this Court seems to have studied in depth and
therefore, arrived at a contrary finding, that is,
the expression "temporarily" would, in the
opinion of the learned Judges of this Court,
make the appointment temporary if the service
itself was temporary, not otherwise. Instead of
qualifying the word "appointed", the expression
"temporarily" has been interpreted to qualify
"the East Pakistan Civil Service (Executive)
Class II." In the particular facts of Ismail
Hossain's case the interpretation so given may
appear to be just and correct, but at the same
time it may seem to be contrary to the general
Principle of interpretation of such expression,
the expression ‘temporarily’, being an adverb
qualifies the verbs "is appointed,” it cannot
qualify the word (East Pakistan Civil) "Service"
Which is a noun. When an officer is selected
from one service to another service by such
expression as "appointed temporarily" the idea
of temporariness attaches to the appointment,
but the temporary nature of appointment may be
'Whittled down by any subsequent event or
development. For example, if an officer is
appointed temporarily. from one service to
another service and continues in the. latter.
service for a very long period, it may become
difficult to hold that he was still a temporary
officer latter service. On the other hand, if
after such appointment he is reverted back to his
parent service soon thereafter, it would be
equally difficult to hold that this could not be .
done as the expression ‘temporarily’ did not
mean that the appointment was temporary.”

24. Indistinguishing the case of Saleh Ahmed
from that of Ismail Hossain, Fazle Munim CJ
observed at para 16 of the report:

"Apart from any possible change of
meaning of the expression "temporarily" that
may occur due to different intentions of the
appointing authority or its subsequent conduct
or development showing the temporary nature
of the appointment, it may be mentioned that
the basis upon which Court arrived at
conclusion in the case of Bangladesh Vs. Md.
Ismail, Hossain, does no longer exist in the
instant case as the cadre itself in which the
appellant was appointed temporarily now stands
abolished. In such background, Ismail Hossain's
case cannot cover the instant case. In Ismail
Hossain's case though the respondent was
appointed temporarily, as the cadre itself
continued to exist, the appointment though
temporary was held to be permanent. Had it
been otherwise, that is, if the cadre stood
abolished at the date of the judgment, the
decision of the Court would have, in all
probability, been different. If the implications
of Ismail Hossain's case are remembered, that is
to say, if the cadre is temporary the
appointment would also be temporary but not
so if the cadre continues to exist then the
abolition of the cadre itself renders that decision

_ inapplicable to the case before us. We were told
that the service was abolished in 1977."

25. Shahabuddin Ahmed, J. as he was then, in
his dissent however observed in para 26 "that the
East Pakistan Civil Service and in which both this
appellant and Md. Ismail Hossain were
"temporarily" appointed was never abolished at any
time; but this cadre was in existence both in 1967
when this appellant was reverted and also in 1973
when Ismail Hossain was reverted".

26. We have quoted at length some
observations made in Saleh Ahmed's case as both
the appellant and the respondent relied on them
adding their own emphasis, but they will be of little
help in the facts of this case. The instant case is not

            
            a case of abolition of cadre. Again, there is nothing
in the conduct of the appointing authority to show
that the respondent's temporary appointment to the
post of IPO was intended to be permanent.

27. In the first few months after liberation of
the country there was a shortage of qualified hands.
Where strict adherence to rule 50 as to 'transfer for
filling temporary vacancy was not practicable, the
sanctioning authority under that very rule is
authorised to make acting arrangement according to
administrative requirements. In the departmental
instructions it has been emphasised that such
temporary appointment to the post of IPOs when
qualified officials are not available will not give a
claim for permanent appointment or for relaxation of
conditions of recruitment to the Inspectors’ cadre.

28. The post of an IPO is a promotion -post.
PW1 asserted that there could not be any promotion
to the post of IPO without appearing successfully in
the competitive examination of the Department. The
respondent, deposing as PW 1, conceded’ that he did
not know any instance of promotion . without
passing the competitive examination. He appeared in
the competitive examination of the Department
during the period when he was officiating as an IPO,
but failed to pass that examination.

29. Our attention is drawn to Mominul Huq
Vs. Bangladesh 38 DLR 391 where one of us,
Mustafa Kamal, J. observed that where in the rules
of service promotion is an act of volition, a matter
of positive action to be taken by the appropriate
authority, one cannot import a legal fiction. The
learned Munsif in a very straightforward manner held
that the plaintiff cannot be retained in the post for
which he is not qualified with the help of the court.

30. Any order of reversion after an 
incumbent's appointed to a higher post and
continuing there for some duration will surely cause
a disappointment as he would no longer draw the
benefits of that higher post, but that cannot be called
a reduction in rank per sec.

31. The uninterrupted service rendered by the 
respondent for about five years, if considered as "one
non-temporary or quasi-permanent", as suggested by
the learned counsel for the respondent, even then the
impugned order of reversion in rank for attracting the
protection under Art. 135 of the Constitution. The
language of the impugned Order indicates in
unmistaken manner that it was never meant to be an
order of promotion. In the facts of the Case the
respondent was not entitled to, any show-cause Notie
nor there was any violation of any Principle of
natural justice.


32. Therefore, the respondent's Contention that
he acquired a vested right to the post of IPO by
virtue of his acting in that capacity for About five
years and enjoying all the emoluments and Other
benefits must fail. The appeal is allowed, The
judgment and decree of the trial Court are restored,
No costs.

Before we part with the case, we like to Point
out and disapprove the manner in which the
paperbook was prepared by the appellant,
Permission was sought and given to the Appellant to
prepare the paper book out of court. The Paper book
is prepared in a most clumsy manner, Not only
papers of different sizes, and photocopies, not easily
readable, were used, the orders mentioned in the
judgments of the courts below were not included,
The very impugned order of reversion is not there,
Subsequently, additional Paper book has been filed
containing a number of departmental circulars
without mentioning whether those were exhibited or
not in the trial Court. The Attorney-General's
Office, which looks after the litigations of the
Republic, the single biggest litigant in the country,
in the Supreme Court, is expected to follow the
rules as to preparation of paper book meticulously
so that it sets up a model other litigants may
emulate. Prayer for dispensation of paper book or
Preparation of paper book out of court if facilely
prayed for and readily allowed then it would not only
whittle down the Rules framed for the convenience
of both the court and the counsel, it will cause
further trouble. if at the hearing of the appeal
additional supplemental paper books arc filed as an
after-thought. The ‘main object of the Rules for
Preparation of paper book is to avoid a clutter which
cannot be used as a sorting device for ascertaining
facts at the last court of the country.

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shabuddin Ahmed CJ,      | Mohammad Ashraf Ali
MH Rahman J, ATM         | Molla (in both the
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J | appeals)......... Appellant
and Latifur Rahman J.    | Vs.
				 |Rajeswar Ghose & others
Judgment 			 |(in both the appeals)......
October 28, 1990. 	 |  Respondents*


president's Order No. 12 of 1972
Article 3

restoration of legal proceedings—When
restoration can be allowed to defendants that had
gold out their interests in the suit lands—In their
application under Art. 12 defendant Nos. 2 & 3 did
not deny the sale of their interests but they asserted
that they had their ancestral homestead in the suit
land and they were co-sharers of the holding and the
suits were compromised in their absence. They were
not required to disclose what stand they would take
in their written statements which could only be
filed after the restoration of the suits. The case
made out by them in their present application that
they are co-sharers was good enough for restoration
of the suits. The law in the case reported in 35
DLR 86 has not been correctly decided. <.....(4-6)

Shaheed Alam, Advocate, instructed by Md.
Sajjadul Hug, Advocate-on-Record (in both the
appeals) — For the Appellant

Ex parte (in both the appeals) — For the
Respondents.

Judgment

MH Rahman J : These two appeals, Civil
Appeal No. 19 of 1990 and Civil Appeal No. 20 of
1990, are disposed of by this judgment. Appellant
filed two suits, Title Suit Nos. 52 and 53 of 1971,
in First Court of Munsif, Pirojpur for a declaration
that he purchased the respective suit lands from
Proforma defendant Nos. 2 and 3 (Respondent Nos. 3
and 4-6) for valuable consideration by three registered


*Civil Appeal Nos. 19 and 20 of 1990.
(From the judgment and order dated 9.2.1989
passed by the High Court Division, Barisal Bench,
Barisal in Civil Revision Case Nos. 103 and 104 of
1982).

Kabalas in the name of defendant No. 1 Sarbeswar
Ghose. The latter's heirs are respondent Nos. 1 and
2. The suits were compromised between the plaintiff
appellant and defendant No. 1 by a solenama dated
22.9.1971. Both the suits were decreed on
compromise against deceased defendant No. 1 and ex
parte against proforma-defendant Nos. 2 and 3,
against whom the appellant did not pray for any
relief,

2. On 6th April, 1982 defendant Nos. 2 and 3
filed two applications for setting aside the ex parte
decrees under Article 3 of the Bangladesh (Legal
Proceedings) Order, 1972 (PO No. 12 of 1972). By
separate orders Dated 30th April, 1982 those
applications were allowed, the decrees were set aside
and the suits were restored to their files and numbers
for re-hearing. The appellant moved unsuccessfully
two revisional applications before the District Judge
and thereafter before the High Court Division.

3. Leave was granted to consider whether the
compromise decrees were outside the mischief of PO
No. 12 of 1972, particularly when as alleged by the
appellant, defendant Nos. 2 and 3 having sold out
their interest in the suit lands had no longer any
subsisting interest to contest the suits. PO No. 12
of 1972 was promulgated on 6th February, 1972 to
provide for the saving of limitation for all legal
proceedings and for the nullification of all
judgments, decrees and orders passed ex parte or in
default of compliance with certain directions in
certain legal proceedings. Article 3 of the PO No. 12
reads as follows:

"Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, all
judgments, decrees or orders passed ex parte by
any Court or Tribunal or orders disposing of
matters due to default in compliance with any
direction of any Court or Tribunal in any legal
proceedings at any time after the Ist day of
March, 1971, and before the commencement of
this Order are hereby declared null and void and
the proceedings shall, on the commencement of
this: Order, continue in accordance with the ©
Law."
'
4. The appellant's contention is that the
compromise decrees were not ex parte decrees as
defendant No. 1 was very much a party to the same.
It is further contended that defendant Nos. 2 and 3 did
not deny that they sold the suit lands to defendant

            
            No. 1 and hence they had no subsisting interest in
the proceedings to file the applications for
restoration of the suits. In support of his first
contention the Iearned counsel for the appellant relied
on Mokbul Ahmed and others Vs. Ali Ekabbar and
others 35 DLR 86, In that case plaintiff filed a title
suit for declaration of title in the suit land against
principal defendants Nos. 1-9 and proforma defendant
Nos. 10-17. Defendant Nos. 1 to 9 entered
appearance, but later on compromised the suit with
the plaintiff. The ex parte decree passed in that suit
was subsequently set aside and the suit was restored
to its file and number.

5. In setting aside the Order of restoration the
Iearned Single Judge observed:

"It is patent that only ex parte judgments,
decrees or orders passed during the period
mentioned in article 3, of PO 12 of 1972 came
under the mischief of the section. Compromise
decrees did not come within the mischief of the
section. There is no doubt that the decrees
against defendants 10-17 came under the
mischief of article 3 of PO 12 of 1972 but this
by itself could not Justify the setting aside of
the decree as a whole and restoration of the suit
without a finding that if ex parte decree against
defendants 10-17 was null and void, the
compromise decree against defendants 1-9 could
not be maintained,"

6. In that decision the compromise decree was
upheld and it was ordered that the ex parte decree
against defendants 10-17 be set aside and their names
be struck off the decree. In that case no one appeared
for the proforma-defendants and it was not agitated
how in view of the clear language of Art. 3 of PO
No. 12 of 1972 a part of the decree namely, the

compromise decree in favour of defendants 1-9 could
be severed and saved from the decree that was passed
ex parte against the other defendants. the law in the
case reported in 35 DLR 86 has not been correctly
decided. In the instant case in refusing to interfere
with the restoration of the two suits under Art. 3 of
PO No. 12 of 1972, the learned Single Judge of the
High Court Division has correctly laid down the
law. We approve the following observation made by
the learned Judge:

"The expression "proforma defendant" does
not appear in any provision of the Code of Civil
Procedure; the term indicates that for the sake of 
form the so-called proforma defendant was made
a party in the suit. In the instant Case although
no relief has been claimed against defendant
Nos. 2 and 3, the claim of the plaintiff is based
on the averment that he purchased the suit lands
from defendant Nos. 2 and 3 and as such the
plaintiff made them parties to the Suit. The
decrees passed on 22.9.1971 show that the suit
was decreed ex parte against defendant Nos. 2
and 3. As such defendant Nos. 2 and 3 has locus
standi to invoke the provisions of Art, 3 of PO
No. 12 of 1972. Even if they did not file any
application the decree became null and void by 
operation of law inasmuch as the Provision of
Art. 3 of PO No. 12 of 1972 provided that Such
decree passed within the time mentioned therein
were declared null and void by that Provision of
law."

We do not find any substance in the appellant's
second contention. In their applications under Article
3 of PO 12 of 1972 defendant Nos. 2 and 3 did not
deny the sale but they asserted that they had their
ancestral homestead in the suit lands and they were
co-sharers of the holding and the suits were decreed
on compromise in their absence. The case made out
by defendant Nos. 2 and 3 was good enough for the
restoration of the suits under Art. 3 of PO No. 12 of
1972. The defendants-respondents were not required
to disclose what stand or plea of defense they would
take in their written Statements which could only be
filed after the restoration of the suits. Accordingly,
we uphold the decision of the High Court Division
and dismiss the two appeals. As no one appears for
the respondents there will be no order as to costs.

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
Aellate Division
(Criminal)


Rahman J, ATM 		| Saimuddin (Md) alias
Afzal J Mustafa Kamal J | Saimuddin & others......
and Latitur Rahman J.   | ....Accused-Appellants
Judgment 			| Vs.
March 17, 1991. 	      |  The State...Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 498

Sentence for one year - The Court ought to have
exercised discretion in granting bail to the appellants
in view of the short sentence of imprisonment.

Golam Rabbani, Senior Advocate, instructed by
Sajjadul Huq, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellants.

Mvi. Wahidulla (Md), Advocate-on-Record —
For the Respondent.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: In this appeal, the
accused-appellants have challenged the order of
refusal to grant bail in Criminal Appeal No. 173 of
1990 by the learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division while admitting the appeal arising out of
an order of conviction and sentence under sections
325/34 and 316/34 of the Penal Code sentencing
each of them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
one year and also to pay a fine.

2. The prosecution case, in brief, is that on
13.5.87 at about 7 PM accused persons armed with
weapons forcibly took away PW 7 Amena Khatun.
Hearing hue and cry of Amena Khatun many people
came did not dare to obstruct the accused
persons. On 14.5.87 Amena Khatun was recovered
by police and she was admitted to the hospital on
the same On 4.6.87, she aborted spontaneously
a dead foetus. On this allegation the appellants ware
put on trial and. convicted and sentenced . as
aloresaid.

*Criminal Appeal No.7 0f 1990. 
(From the Order dated 12.3.9 passed by the
High Court Division, Dhaka Criminal Appeal No. 173
of 1990)

The defence case was that the appellants have
been falsely implicated in this case out of several
litigations.

3. On being convicted by the Additional
Sessions Judge, Rajshahi in Sessions Case No. 91
of 1987 as mentioned above, an appeal was preferred
before the High Court Division with a prayer for
bail. The learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division admitted the appeal but refused to grant
bail.

4. Leave was granted to consider whether in
view of short sentence of one year only, the
appellants ought to have been granted bail by the
learned Single Judge of the High Court Division in
exercise of judicial discretion.

5. It appears that the sentences of the eight
appellants are only for the short period of one year
and if they could not be enlarged on bail during this
period then in all probability they will serve out
their sentences as the appeal is not likely to be made
ready for disposal during the period of their
imprisonment. Thus, we are of the view that the
learned Single Judge of the High Court Division
ought to have exercised his discretion in granting
bail to these appellants in view of the short sentence
of imprisonment. Further, it is also the practice of
the High Court Division that in case of short
sentence of this nature normally bail is granted and
we do not find any particular reason for making a
departure from this normal practice, when the
sentence is really of one year. Thus, considering the
short period of sentence we grant bail to the
appellants.

The appeal is allowed. Let the appellants be
released on bail to the satisfaction of the Deputy
Commissioner, Rajshahi till disposal of the
Criminal Appeal No. 173 of 1990 now pending in
the High Court Division, Dhaka.

Ed.


            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Narayan Chandra Sil.......
MH Rahman J, ATM      | Judgment-debtor-Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa      | Vs.
Kamal J and Latifur   | Manhar Mandal being dead
Rahman J. 		    | his heirs, Bismapada
Judgment 		    | Mondal and others..........
November 11, 1990.    | ..Decree-holder-Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Order XXI rules 68 & 90

Setting aside auction sale—The High Court
Division upheld the sale only on the ground that the
son of defendant No. 1 being heir of the
judgment-debtor contested the suit and as such it
must be presumed the son had knowledge of the
execution case when he himself was a party in the
execution proceeding. High Court Division failed to
consider that the decree was put into execution for
realisation of decretal costs and the main question
was whether the auction sale was legally held and to
these material questions no judicial mind was
applied. Consequently, the judgment is liable to be
set aside.

M Nowab Ali, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellant.

Not Represented — Respondent Nos. 1(a) to 1( é).

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 2-5.

Judgment

Latifur Rahman J: This appeal at the
instance of the judgment-debtor is directed against
the judgment of the High Court Division passed in
Civil Revision No. 1331 of 1977 upholding the
auction sale, after setting aside the judgments of the
courts below wherein the auction sale was set aside
by the Courts.

2. The appellant filed a Miscellaneous case
under Order 21 rule 90 of the Code of Civil
Procedure for selling aside the sale held on
19.8.1969. The appellant's Case, in short, is that the

*Civil Appeal No. 68 of 1985.

(From the Judgment and order 10th February,
1982 passed by the High Court Division in Civil
Revision No. 1331 of 1977).


respondents obtained a fraudulent decree in Title Suit
No. 144 of 1959 and thereafter they filed Title
Execution Case No. 3 of 1962 for realisation of
costs of the decree. After suppressing all processes
in the Title Execution case they got the land in
dispute auction purchased at a very shockingly low
price: without the knowledge of the appellant, that
there was material irregularity and fraud in
publishing and conducting the sale, that no sale
proclamation was served upon the land in disputes
and that the auction purchaser never took delivery of
possession by beat of drum through court, The
appellant came to know about the auction Sale of the
disputed property from one Sambhu Nath Agrason
for the first time on 8.6.1970 and filed the Case for
setting aside the auction sale on 11.7.70.

3. The case of respondent-decree-holder, is
that, the application was hopelessly barred by time
and that the disputed land was auction purchased by
the respondent, after observing all formalities
through court by beating of drum in pursuance of
Title Execution Case No. 3 of 1962. The respondent
also asserted that there were no irregularities and
fraud in publishing and conducting the sale.

4. Leave was granted to consider whether the
learned single Judge of the High Court Division was
correct in setting aside the judgment of affirmance of
the appellate Court’ which found material
irregularities and fraud in publishing and conducting
the sale, by overlooking the provision of Order 21
rule 68 of the Code of Civil Procedure and whether
he wrongly upheld the auction sale in question.

5. Both the trial Court and the lower appellate
Court framed several issues along with the two
material issues as to whether the Miscellaneous case
was barred by limitation and whether there were
material irregularities or fraud in publishing and
conducting the sale and if so whether the appellant
had sustained any substantial injury by reason of
such irregularity or fraud.

6. It appears from ‘the judgment of the trial
Court and the appellate Court that the judgment-
debtor came to know about the auction sale from
one Sambu Nath Agrason on 8.6.70 and thereafter
he went to Gopalganj, obtained particulars of the
case and then filed this- Miscellaneous case for
setting aside. the -sale on 11.7.70. The lower
appellate Court found: that the judgment-debtor had
no previous knowledge of the sale before 8.6.7o and

            
            in that view found that the application for setting
aide the sale was not barred by limitation. Further,
the Appellate Court found that sale proclamation
exhibit 1(a) was proclaimed at the disputed property
on 18.7.69 and at the notice board of the Court
house on 2 on 22.7.69 fixing 11.8.69 for sale but the
impugned sale took place on 19.8.69, that is less
than 30 days of affixing the sale proclamation in the
Court House in violation of the mandatory provision
of Order 21 rule 68 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
the lower appellate Court further found that the
process server and the drummer who beat the drum at
the time of attachment of sale proclamation were not
produced in the case to prove that Iegal formalities as
to the sale of the land were observed. The lower
appellate Court also found that the land measuring
4.08 acres of land was sold at a nominal price of
Taka 691/57 paisa which was evidently a shockingly
low price. After all these material findings, the lower
appellate Court held that there were material
inegularities and fraud in publishing and conducting
the sale of the disputed land. and. consequently
affirmed the judgment of the trial Court and set aside
the auction sale.

7. Mr. M Nowab Ali, Iearned Advocate-on-
Record appearing for the appellant, submits that the
leaned single Judge of the High Court Division
acted illegally in setting aside the concurrent findings
of fact without even entering into the merit of those
findings and consequently the judgment of the High
Court Division is liable to be set aside.

8. At the outset we must say that the learned
single Judge of the High Court Division did not at
all consider the material findings of the Courts
below before setting aside the concurrent judgment
of the appellate Court. The learned single Judge of
the High Court Division upheld the sale only on the
ground that the son of defendant No. 1 being heir of
judgement-debtor contested the suit and as such it
must be Presumed that the son of defendant No. 1
had knowledge of the execution case when he
himself was a party in the execution proceeding.
This observation of the learned single Judge cannot
be accepted as there is no legal presumption that the
the observation of the learned single Judge of the
the son of defendant No.1 who was a party in the suit
must be aware of the execution proceeding. The
application for setting aside the sale having been
filed by the judgement-debtor himself and he having
proved his independent knowledge of auction sale,
the observation of the learned single Judge of the
High Court Division that "the son of defendant No. 1
having failed to rebut such presumption being a heir
of contesting judgment-debtor to have had
knowledge about the decree and the execution case,
the courts below could not set aside the auction sale
pursuant to such a valid decree". The learned single
Judge of the High Court Division failed to consider
that the decree was put into execution for realisation
of decretal costs and the validity of the decree was
not under challenge and the main question was
whether the auction sale was validly and Iegally
held. It appears that the Iearned single Judge of the
High Court Division did not apply his judicial mind
to those material questions touching upon the
auction sale. Consequently, the judgment of the
High Court Division is liable to be set aside.

In the result, the appeal is allowed without
costs.

Ed.

son oped as there is no legal presumption that the...

must poe edant No. 1 who was a party in the ‘suit
aDpleiiee ae of the execution proceeding. The
fileg iy the for setting aside the sale having been
Proved ¢: Judgment-debtor himself and he having
he _'S Independent knowledge of auction sale,
ioe “ef ae are 26 EU

            
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)
Shahabuddin      | Bangladesh Parjatan Corporation.
Ahmed CJ,        |... Appellants (in all the appeals)
ATM Afzal J,     | Vs.
Mustafa Kamal J  | Shahid Hossain Bhuiyan (Md) &
and Latifur      | others ...................Respondents*
Rahman J. 	     | (in CA No. 33/1990)
		     | Mosharmaf Hossain Khan & others
Judgment 	     | .........................Respondents*
August 8, 1970:  |(in CA No. 34/1990)
		     | Momtaz Begum and others........
		     |  ................... Respondents*
		     | (in CA No. 35/1990)
		     | Sorhabur Rahman and others......
		     | ..................... Respondents*
		     | (in CA No. 36/1990)
		     | A Sattar and others..............
		     | ...................Respondents*
		     | (in CA No. 37/1990)
		     | Md. Shahidullah and others........
		     |.................Respondents*
		     | (in CA No. 38/1990)
		     |Rukshana Parveen and others.....
		     |.......... Respondents*
		     |(in CA No. 39/1990)

Bangladesh Parjatan Corporation
Service Rules, 1980
Rule 41(2)(i)(iv)
Termination of service of employees of a
Statutory body—No reason was required to be
assigned for their termination—If the termination is
found to be within the four corners of the law the
court cannot nullify it on the ground that it is harsh.
There is no requirement in the Rules that
termination would be void when no reason for it was
assigned. The principle of natural justice is also not
applicable in the case as this principle has been
excluded in the Rule itself. The appointing authority
has got power to reinstate a terminated employee, in


*Civil Appeal Nos. 33 to 39 of 1990.

(From the judgment and order dated 13.11.89
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka, in Writ
Petition Nos. 167, 168, 169, 170, 219, 220 and 221
of 1987.).


exclusion of some others, on merit of individual
case—The contention of discrimination on that score
is without any substance.            .......(5-7)

Akhtar Imam, Advocate (appeared with the leave
of the Court) instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellants in all the
appeals,

A Baset Majumder, Advocate-on-Record For
the Respondent No, 1 in all the appeals,

Not represented — For the Respondent Nos 2-3
In all the appeals.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: All these Seven
appeals have been brought by special Ieave granted
by us on 20 May, 1990. A common question of law
being involved in these appeals which are also
directed against the same order of the High Court
Division, they have been heard together and are
going to be disposed of by this judgment. The
principal question for determination is whether any
reason was required to be assigned for termination of
the services of the respondents, who were employees
of the Bangladesh Parjatan Corporation, a Statutory
body, established under PO No. 143 of 1972.

2. The Bangladesh Parjatan Corporation,
briefly the "Corporation", is the appellant. The
Corporation, by separate orders, all dated 13
December 1986, terminated the services of these
respondents-employees on 30 days’ notice or with 30
days’ pay in lieu thereof, under Rule 41(2)(i)(iv) of
the Corporation's Service Rules of the year 1980.
All the respondents, who were employees of the
Corporation in the rank of Sales Assistants and the
like, by separate writ petitions, challenged the orders
of termination alleging that they were punished in
the garb of termination, that it was not a case of
termination simpliciter but it was dismissal from
service without serving any show cause notice of
assigning any reason, that the order of termination
was arbitrary and malafide. All the writ petitions
were contested by the Corporation taking
common ground that there was no necessity for
serving any show-cause notice or assigning any
reason for the termination which was terminal
simpliciter, made in accordance with the service
Rules, namely Rule 41(2)(i)(iv) and that there was
no malafide in the matter, The learned judges of the

            
            High Court Division held that the respondents were
permanent employees of the Corporation having put
is several years of service, and as such, they had a
right to continue in their service till the age of
superannuation at 57, and that for termination of
their services reasons should have been assigned; and
on these findings the learned judges declared the
terminations invalid.

3. Mr. Akhtar Imam, learned Advocate has
appeared for the Corporation with the leave of the
court, and Mr. Abdul Baset Majumder, learned
advocate on Record, has appeared for the
respondents.

4. The respondents are found to be regular
employees of the Corporation, a statutory body, and
their services are regulated by statutory rules. As
such they are not governed by the law of master and
servant. For their dismissal, removal, termination,
discharge or for any other punishment the
Corporation is required to follow the procedures
prescribed in the Rules. These Rules have been made
by the Government in exercise of the powers
conferred by Article 21 of P O 143 of 1972. Chapter
II of the Service Rules, 1980, containing sections 37
to 41, deals with suspension, removal, dismissal,
termination and resignation. Sub-rule (1) of Rule 41
provides for termination of the service of an officer
or employee during the period of probation, at any
time, without any reason being assigned. Sub-rule
(2) of Rule 41 provides for termination of the service
of an officer or employee during his regular service
Period. Regular service, it appears, means service on
confirmation in service after conclusion of the period
of probation. In this sense an officer or employee
may be called a permanent officer or employee,
though this expression has not been used in the
Rules. Clause (i) for sub-rule (2) provides for
termination by 30 days' notice on either side, clause
(iv) of sub-rule (2) provides for termination by the
corporation by 30 days' notice or by payment of 30
days' pay in lieu thereof. The impugned orders of
termination are found to have’ been made in
accordance with clause (iv) of sub-rule (2) of Rule
41. This Rule does not require the Corporation to
assign any reason or to serve any show-cause notice,
for termination of an officer/employee. .

5. This provision for termination is.
undoubtedly a harsh provision, for even. an
officer/employee having a long period of service to
his credit may be determined just. by 30 days’ notice
or by paying 30 days’ salary in licu thereof.
Possibility of arbitrary exercise of this power to
terminate is there. The pay in licu of notice is also
very negligible i.e., one month’s pay. In many other
organisations or industrial establishments, ordinarily
three months' pay, along with gratuity at the rate of
one month's pay for each completed ycar of service
is allowed to a terminated employce. In such cases,
an employee terminated cannot have any grievance;
it is the payment of this and other service bencfits
which put a check upon arbitrary exercise of the
power to terminate. But a Court cannot declare a law
invalid on the ground that it is harsh or unjust. If
the termination is found to be within the four
corners of the law the Court cannot nullify it on the
ground that it is harsh or cruel.

6. The main ground shown by the High Court
Division in this case to declare the termination void
is that no reason for the termination was assigned.
We, however, find that there is no such requirement
in the Rules. Similarly, the principle of natural
justice by serving a show cause notice is also not
applicable in this case as this principle has been
excluded in the Rule Itself.

7. Mr. Abdul Baset Majumder contends that
the impugned termination is an act of punishment in
disguise and that it is a malafide act on the part of
the General Manager who became displeased with
the respondents, who had been in the service for a
long time, when they made some suggestions for
improvement in the Duty Free shop of the
Corporation. Though in @heir writ pctitions the
respondents made a gencral allegation of malafide,
no facts and materials were produced to make out a
case of malafide exercise of power to terminate. The
High Court Division also did not find any malafidé
in the matter. The High Court Division rejected, and
we think rightly, a contention of the respondents
that their services are governed by Article 135 of the
Constitution. They are not protected. under’Article
135 of the Constitution as they.are not persons in
the service of the Republic. Mr. A Baset Majumder
has referred to Act XLI of 1974 which provides for
retirement of public servants and has argued that in
that statute employces-of statutory Corporations
have been treated as public servants. This argument
has got no substance as no question of retirement of
the respondents is involved in the instant case. Mr.

            
            Baset Majumder next contends that some colleagues
of the respondents, whose services were also
terminated, have been subsequently reinstated, but
they have been discriminated against. This argument
is also without any substance, for the appointing
authorities have got power to reinstate a terminated
employee on the merit of his individual case.

On examination of the relevant rules and facts of
the case we find that the assigning of reason for
terminating not being a requirement of any law, the
order of the High Coun Division is crroneous. We
also do not find anything to hold that the
termination had been resorted to as a measure of
punishment. In the result, all the appeals are allowed
without, however, any cost, and the impugned order
of the High Court Division is set aside.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,  | Anwara Begum and others
MH Rahman J, ATM       | ....Defendants-Appellants
Afzal J and Latifur    |
Rahman J. 		     | Vs.
Judgment 		     | Shahanewaz and another
August 22, 1990. 	     | ...Plaintiff-Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. XLI rr. 4 & 20

Non-appealing defendant—Condition for
impleading such a defendant in the appeal—An
appeal can be filed by some of the defendants when it
proceeds from a ground common to all the
defendants. But the appeal which was incompetent at
its inception for omission to implead a necessary
party would remain incompetent till the end of it,
unless otherwise during the pendency of the appeal
necessary parties are brought on record.

Admittedly defendant No. 2 was a necessary party
in the appeal before the High Court Division and his
addition as a party after the period of limitation could
have been cured provided the appellants would have
prayed for the same. It is found from the record that the

*Civil Appeal No. 43 of 1989. °

(From the Judgment and decree dated 5th March,
1989 passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in
Appeal From Original Decree No. 24 of 1985).


appeal was filed on 6.2.1985 and the matter was taken
up for final hearing on 5.3.89 and even at this stage no
application was filed for adding defendant No.2 as
party respondent by the appellants. Necessary party
having been omitted, the appellate Court could have
exercised its discretion vested in it under Order 41 rule
20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but the Same cannot
be done suo motu by the Court itself without any
application by the appealing defendants themselves
Per Latifur Rahman J.

Once it is found that the decree appealed from by
some of the defendants was joint and invisible
against all the defendants, then it follows their
failure to implead the remaining defendants, or any of
them would render the appeal incompetent, The
principle underlying this rule is that Otherwise
inconsistent and contradictory decrees would come into
existence regarding the same subject matter and aS a
result of the same litigation. In order to hold that an
appeal has become non-maintainable in the absence of
a non-appealing plaintiff or defendant, as the case may
be, it is necessary to give further reason than merely
saying that rule 4 does not apply. It is possible to argue
in both ways in the facts of a given case (and why not
in this case also) that in the absence of a non-appealing
plaintiff or defendant an appeal has or has not abated or
become non-maintainable as a whole and it is for the
Court to decide one way or the other. The High Court
Division has not done this exercise at all before finding
that the appeal was not maintainable: Per ATM Afzal J.
(agreeing).

Joy Kumar Datta and others Vs. Sitanath Datta
reported in 4 DLR 400; Shah Muhammad and others Vs.
Muhammad Bakhsh reported in PLD 1972 (SC) 321,
Hamoodur Rahman CJ; Mst. Murad Begum ete. Vs.
Muhammad Rafiq Etc. reported in PLD 1974 (SC) 322;
Muhammad Jamil Vs. The Chairman, Industrial Court,
West Pakistan and another reported in PLD 1964 (SC)
559; Iman Ali Halsana and others Vs. Furkun Ali
Mondal and others reported in PLD 1960 (Dacca) 3=11
DLR 347; Hupen Majhi Vs. Munshi A Khair 32 DLR
(AD) 96; 17 DLR, Dhaka 643 in the case of Mohendra
Nath Vs. Susila; 12 DLR 745 and 16 DLR (SC) 386; ref
 ..............(7, 10-13, 15, 17, 32-35, 37 & 38)

Mad. Fazlul Karim, Senior Advocate, instructed
by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record —For
the Appellants. 
TH Khan, Senior Advocate, instructed by Miah
Abdul Gafur, Advocate-on-Record — For
Respondent No. 1.

Ex parte — Respondent No. 2.

» Moinul Hug, Advocate — Amicus Curiae.

            
            Judgment

Rahman J: The point involved in
this appeal by special Ieave is, whether the provision
of rule 4 of Order 41 of the Code of Civil Procedure
can be applied when the non-appealing defendant has
not been impleaded in the appeal at all and is not
begore the Appellate Court,

2.The short fact that will be necessary for
disposal of this appeal, is that, plaintiff-respondent
No.1 filed Title Suit No. 491 of 1981 in the Court
of 4th Subordinate Judge, Dhaka against the
defendants-appellants and one Afroza Begum
defendant No. 2) for specific performance of
contract. The suit was ultimately decreed ex parte
against all the defendants namely, defendant Nos. 1-7
and defendant Nos. 1-6 were directed to execute and
register the sale deed within 60 days in favour of the
plaintiff failing which plaintiff will get the same
through court.

3. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid ex parte
decree, defendant Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 filed First
Appeal No. 24 of 1985 before the High Court
Division, Dhaka. Defendant No. 2 Afroza Begum did
not file any appeal nor was she impleaded in the
appeal as a party respondent by the appealing
defendants. Plaintiff took a preliminary objection as
to the maintainability of the appeal in the absence of
defendant No. 2, when she was not impleaded as a
party respondent in the appeal though she was a
necessary party in the appcal.

4. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division by the impugned order upheld the
contention of the plaintiff and held that the appcal
Was incompetent and not maintainable and in that
view rule 4 of Order 41 of the Code of Civil
Procedure had no application in the First Appeal
before the High Court Division.

5. Mr. Md. Fazlul Karim, learned Advocate
appearing for the defendants-appellants, submits that
in view of rule 4 of Order 41 of the Code of Civil
procedure, one of several defendants may obtain
reversal of the whole decree where it proceeds on
of the High Court Division wrongly held that the
appeal was not maintainable and in that
view rule 4 of Order 41 of the Code of Civil
Procedure had no application in the First Appeal
before the High Court Division.

5. Mr. Md. Fazlul Karim, learned Advocate
appearing for the defendants-appellants, submits that
in view of rule 4 of Order 41 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, one of the several defendants may obtain
reversal of the whole decree where it proceeds on
ground common to all and as such the learned Judges
of the High Court Division wrongly held that the
appeal was not maintainable without making
defendant No. 2 a party-respondent in the appeal. He
next contends that Order 41 rule 20 of the Code
authorises the appellate Court to add a respodent
who was a party in the suit, but who has not been
made a party in the appcal and Icarned Judges ought
to have exercised their discretion in this regard.

6. Mr. TH Khan, Icarned Advocate appearing
for the plaintiff-respondent, submits that Order 41
Tule 4 of the Code has no application in the appcal
before the High Court Division as the appcal was
incompetent and not maintainable duc to non-
implcading of a necessary party.

7. Mr. Moinul Huq, Icarncd Advocate
appearing as Amicus Curiae submits that the
observation of the Iearned Judges of the High Court
Division that rule 4 of Ordcr 41 of the Code,
"applics only when the non-appealing plaintiff or
defendant is implcaded in the appeal", is not correct.
He further submits that what is truc for a suit is not
truc for an appcal and thercby he submits that the
impugned order is not a lawful onc. In support of
his contentions he has cited the case of Joy Kumar
Datta and others Vs. Sitanath Datta reported in 4
DLR 400.

8. From the tcnor of arguments of the Icarned
Advocate for the appellants and from the
submissions of the learned Amicus Curiae, it
appears that they wanted to argue that rule 4 of Order
41 of the Code is an enabling provision by which
one of several plaintiffs or defendants to a decree
procecding on a common ground can prefer an appcal
and this rule nowhere speaks of adding the non-
appealing plaintiffs or defendants as a party
respondent in the appeal. According to them, some
of the appealing defendants can take the bencfit of
this enabling provision without bringing the non-
appealing defendant on record.

9. On the other hand, Mr. TH Khan, Icarned
Advocate, broadly contends that this provision of
Order 41 rule 4 of the Code can be called in aid only
when the necessary parties are before the appellate
Court and non-implcading of the remaining
defendants or any of them when the decree appealed
from by some of the defendants is joint and
indivisible is fatal to the appeal.

10. At the outset it is to be stated that in the
present case the plaintiff got an ex parte decree
against defendants 1-6 and the decree was joint and
indivisible against all the defendants. Consequently,
if any of the non-appealing defendant is not brought
on record and not before the appellate Court then

            
            there is a possibility of inconsistent and
contradictory decrees regarding the same subject
mater under litigation, An appeal can be filed by
some of the defendants when it proceeds from a
ground common to all the defendants under Order 41
rule 4 of the Code. The language of rule 4 of Order
41 of the Code creates a legal fiction in the sense
that the appeal filed by some of the defendants will
be treated to be an appeal on behalf of all the
defendants and the benefit of the appeal may be
extended in favour of the non-appealing defendants
by the appellate Court, This legal fiction has been
created for the benefit of those who preferred the
appeal as well as for those who are not preferring
appeal, as because the ground of the decree against
all of them is common. Thus the provision of rule 4
of Order 41 only authorises one of the several
plaintiffs or defendants to prefer appeal. But the
appeal which was incompetent at its inception for
omission to implead a necessary party would remain
incompetent till the end of it, unless otherwise
during the pendency of the appeal necessary parties
are brought on record.

11. There is a long line of decisions of this
sub-continent that rule 4 of Order 41 of the Code
will apply provided the appeal is properly
constituted. In the case of Shah Muhammad and
others Vs. Muhammad Bakhsh reported in PLD
1972 (SC) 321, Hamoodur Rahman, CJ delivering
the judgment observed as follows :

“This is merely an enabling provision
which confers a privilege on one of the
plaintiffs or defendants to prefer an appeal from
a decree which proceeds on any ground common
to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants. It
nowhere lays down that any person, who is a
necessary party to the appeal, can be excluded
and still the appeal will be properly constituted.
The provisions of this rule do not also exclude
the operation of the provisions of Order XXII of
the Code. They would apply only where the
provisions of Order XXII pose no difficulty in
the prosecution of the appeal. In order to
exercise the powers given by this rule, all
persons to be affected by the order must be
before a Court. It would be totally wrong to
hold that an Appellate Court can proceed to hear
an appeal, even if the necessary parties are not
before it. The provisions of this rule do not,
therefore, indicate that any Abatement that
occurs on the death of one of the appellants can
be ignored or overlooked or even set aside. It
would be wholly wrong to think that the
provisions of rule 4 of Order XLI of the Civil
Procedure Code nullify the provisions of, rules 3
and 4 of Order XXII, or that they Prevent an
appeal from abatement if it Otherwise Stands
abated. If we were to read the provisions of rule
4 of Order XLI in the manner in Which the
learned counsel appearing for the appellants
wants us to do, then it would render Completaly
nugatory the other provisions of the Code
relating to abatement of appeals. This could Not
have been the intention of the framers of the
above-mentioned rule. As was rightly Pointed
out by a Full Bench of the Lahore High Court
in the case of Nanak Vs. Ahmad Ali, the
provisions of rule 4 of Order XLI of the Code
cannot be applied where the non-appealing
plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, has
not been impleaded in the appeal at all and is
not before the appellate Court."

12. Ason fact we have already found that the
plaintiff's suit was a suit for specific performance of
contract against all the defendants wherein the decree
appealed from was joint and indivisible. In the case
of Mst. Murad Begum etc. Vs. Muhammad Rafiq
etc. reported in PLD 1974 (SC) 322, which was a
case of specific performance of contract, the
plaintiffs got ex parte decree against 16 defendants
and the regular First Appeal before the High Court
was filed only by 7 defendants out of 16 defendants,
impleading 5 defendants as respondents and Leaving
out 4 defendants altogether and the Supreme Court
held that the appeal being not properly constituted
must be dismissed on that score. In that decision the
Supreme Court held as follows:

"Once it is found that the decree appealed
from by some of the defendants was joint and
indivisible against all the defendants, then it
follows that their failure to implead the
remaining defendants, or any of them would
render the appeal incompetent. The principle
underlying this rule is that otherwise
inconsistent and contradictory decrees would
come into existence regarding the same
subject-matter and as a result of same
litigation. This principle has been reiterated by



            
            the superior Courts on several occasions."
13. In the case of Nanak Vs. Ahmad Ali
reported in AIR 1946 Lahore 399 (Full Bench),
while interpreting Order 41 rule 4, the learned Judges
observed as follows :
 Mr. Asa Ram Aggarwal, the Iearned
counsel for the appellant, had to concede that
according to the view consistently taken in this
Court rule 4 of Order 41 cannot be applied where
the non-appealing plaintiff or defendant, as the
case may be, has not been impleaded in the
peal at all and is not before the appellate
Court."

14. Thus, the learned Judges of the High
court Division were perfectly correct in holding that
the appeal before the High Court Division was
incompetent and not maintainable in law. From the
judgment of the High Court Division it appears that
the preliminary objection was taken by the plaintiff
is to the maintainability of the appeal and the
learned Advocate for the appellant failed to furnish
any substantial argument against this objection and
rerred to Order 41 rule 4 of the Code in support of
the maintainability of the appeal.

15. In disposing of this appeal, we may point
out that admittedly defendant No. 2 was a necessary
party in the appeal before the High Court Division
and his addition as a party after the period of
limitation could have been cured provided the
appellants would have prayed for the same. It is
found from the record that the appeal was filed on
6.2.1985 and the matter was taken up for final
hearing on 5.3.89 and even at this stage no
application was filed for adding defendant No. 2 as
party respodant by the appellants. Necessary party
having been omitted, the appellate Court could have
excercised its discretion vested in it under Order 41
Rule 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but the same
cannot be done suo motu by the Court itself without
any application by the. appealing defendants
themselves. In the case of Muhammad Jamil Vs.
"the chairman, Industrial Court, West Pakistan and
mother reported in PLD 1964 (SC) 559, Fazle.
Aktar J observed as follows:
Mr Zaman has prayed for condonation of
delay No doubt under Order XLI, rule 20 of the
Code of Civil Procedure the Court has power in
a proper case to allow a necessary party to be -
added as respondent, but the power to take the
action is discretionary and should not be
exercised in case of extreme neglect. On 13th
February, 1963, the Court enquired suo motu
why the employer was not added as a party in
this case and the appellant therefore on 19th
February, 1963, filed a petition for adding the
employer as a respondent in the appeal. He,
however, even then did not file any petition for
condonation of the delay. In the petition he
merely stated that through inadvertence he did
not implead the employer as a party. The
employer has acquired a valuable right which we
do not think should be taken away from him in
the circumstances of the present case. The
preliminary objection therefore ought to
prevail."

16. Thus, the second point of Mr. Fazlul
Karim cannot be accepted when there is nothing on
record to show that at any point of time any
application was filed before the High Court Division
during the pendency of the appeal for four years for
addition of defendant No. 2 as a party respondent.

17. Before parting with the case it may be
mentioned that the point involved in this appeal
being so elementary and fundamental, the assistance
which was expected from Mr. Moinul Hug appearing
as Amicus Curiae was not sufficient. Since Mr.
Moinul Huq has cited 4 DLR case, we need to
speak a word in this regard. The 4 DLR case was
primarily a case relating to adoption under
Dayabhaga School of Hindu Law. From the
concluding portion of the reported decision it appears
that an argument was made by the appellants that
the appeals were not maintainable inasmuch as all
the defendants were not made parties. In reply, the
Iearned Advocate for the respondents contended that
rule 4 Order 41 of the Code speaks of filing of
appeal by defendants on behalf of all the defendants.
In the context of that case, the reference of rule 4
Order 41 of the Code in that case by the learned
Judges is nothing but an obiter. Further, this
decision was placed before Mr. Fazle Akbar, J.
himself in a subsequent case of Iman Ali Halsana
and others Vs. Furkun Ali Mondal and others
reported in PLD 1960 (Dacca) 3 = 11 DLR 347. In
that case a preliminary objection was taken that
appellant No. 1 having died during the pendency of
the second appeal, and no steps having been taken

            
            for substitution of his legal representative the appeal
abated. In that case the learned Advocate for the
appellant tried to overcome this difficulty by seeking
aid of Order 41 rule 4 of the Code, wherein Fazle
Akbar, J. observed keeping in view of the 4 DLR
case as follows :
“If, at this stage, by exercising power under
Onder XLT, rule 4, we reverse the entire decree, we
shall be trenching upon other provisions of the
Code. We think that Order XLI rule 4, should not
be applied to enable the litigants to ignore the
other provisions of the Code. We, therefore,
respectfully agree with the observations of the
Full Bench of the Patna and Lahore High Courts
that Order XLI rule 4, cannot override or create
exceptions to Order XXII rules 3 and 11.
Furthermore, in our opinion, sub-rule (4) of rule
4 of Order XXII docs not help the appellants in
this case. In these circumstances, we hold that
the provisions of Order XLI rule 4 cannot be
applied to this case."

18. Thus, we have no hesitation to hold that
the observation of the 4 DLR case on which Mr.
Moinul Hug relied is just an obiter and not a judicial
dictum. Mr. Moinul Huq's submission that what is
true for a suit is not true of an appeal is difficult to
understand, simply because if a suit or appeal is
imperfectly constituted, it is obvious that it must be
dismissed.

19. For the reasons stated above, the
application filed by defendant No. 2, Afroza Begum
before this Court for addition as party is rejected.
Consequently, the appeal is dismissed without any
order as to costs.

ATM Afzal J: I have ultimately decided to
fall in line with the majority opinion that the appeal
be dismissed but that is not to say that I have found
the judgment of the High Court Division to be
wholly satisfactory. I shall explain why.

21. Facts of the case, briefly, are that
respondent No, 1 as plaintiff filed Title Suit No. 491
of 1981 in the 4th Court of the Subordinate Judge,
Dhaka against the appellants, who are defendant Nos.
1 and 3-6, Afroza Begum (defendant No. 2) and the
Government (defendant No. 7) for specific
performance of contract for sale of the suit land. The
plaintiff alleged that defendant Nos. 1-6 as heirs of
late Md. Hossain Bhuiyan inherited lands at Savar
and they executed a bainapatra on 8.12.79 for sale of
some lands out of 5 bighas situated at Nayabari
mouza at Savar, IL was, however, found that the said
Md. Hossain had no interest in the said land but he
had some other land at Mohammadpur for Which two
sale deeds were executed on 7.5.80. The appellants
are executants of the said sale deeds but defendant
No. 2, Afroza Begum did not execute the same
However, the defendants subsequently change their
mind and the plaintiff preferred appeal before the
District Registrar for registering of the said two sale
deeds. The District Registrar having found that, the
sale deeds had not been proved refused to register the
same under the Registration Act on 27.2.81
whereupon the plaintiff filed the present suit,

22. The suit was decreed ex parte on 1.10.84
and defendant Nos. 1-6 were directed to execute and
register a deed of sale in favour of the plaintiff,

23. The appellants being aggrieved by the said
ex parte decree preferred First Appeal No. 24 of 1985
in the High Court Division, Dhaka.

24. It has been stated by the appellants in the
leave petition that through inadvertence defendant
No. 2 Afroza Begum was not made a party in the
said First Appeal. At the hearing of the appeal a.
preliminary objection was raised on behalf of the
plaintiff-respondent that the appeal was incompetent
and as such not maintainable inasmuch as defendant
No. 2 Afroza Begum neither filed any appeal nor she
was impleaded as respondent by the appellants. The
Iearned Judges of the High Court Division upon
considering the provisions of Order XLI rule 4 of the
Code of Civil Procedure found that "the defendant
No. 2, Afroza Begum having not been impleaded in
the appeal the rule docs not apply in the present
appeal. That being the position the appeal is
incompetent and as such not maintainable". 
Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

25. It will be seen that the High Court
Division found the appeal to be not maintainable
merely because the provisions of Order XLI rule 4
CPC was inapplicable in the absence of defendant
No. 2 Afroza Begum. Was it a sufficient finding for
dismissing the appeal ? That is the question at
issue.

26. Order XLI tule 4 CPC reads as follows:

4. "Where there are more plaintiffs or more
defendants than one in a suit, and the decree

            
            appealed from proceeds on any ground common
to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, any
one of the plaintiffs or of the defendants may
appeal from the whole decree, and thereupon the
appellate Court may reverse or vary the decree
in favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as
the case may be.

27. This rule does not say anything about
maintainability or non-maintainability of an appeal.
it has two parts. The first part says that where
there are more plaintiffs or more defendants than one
in a suit and the decree appealed from proceeds on
any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the
defendant, any one of the plaintiffs or of the
defendants may appeal from the whole decree. This is
an enabling provision so far as the parties are
concerned. The other part which is also an enabling
provision 1s in respect of the Appellate Court. It
says that in the case of an appeal as aforesaid the
appellate Court may reverse or vary the decree in
favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case
may be. It is, therefore, clear that it cannot be said
only with reference to the provision of rule 4, as the
High Court Division has done in the present case,
that an appeal in the absence of a non-appealing
plaintiff or defendant has become non-maintainable.
In order to reach the conclusion that the appeal has
become non-maintainable it was necessary to find
something further, such as, that the party which was
left out was a necessary party or that the decree was
indivisible for which the appeal could not be
proceeded with, over and above finding that rule 4
does not apply when the non-appealing plaintiff or
defendant is not impleaded in the appeal. It is one
thing to say that rule 4 does not apply and it is quite
different to hold that the appeal has become
non maintainable. To illustrate the point the Full
bench case of the Lahore High Court, Nanak Ys.
Ahmed Alli AIR (33) 1946 Lahore 399 which has
been followed in many subsequent cases and referred
to by my learned brother Latifur Rahman, J may be
Noticed, In that case one Ahmed Ali brought a suit
for the cancellation of a sale deed executed by one
Gumani dedendant No. 1, in favour of Nanak and
Khair ud Din defendants 2 and 3. The suit was
decreed by the First Appellate Court and against the
said decree both defendants 2 and 3 filed a second
appeal in the High Court. During the pendency of
the appeal Nanak died but his legal representatives
were not on record in time. It was contended
by the plaintiff-respondent that the appeal had abated
not only against Nanak but it would be deemed to
have abated as a whole inasmuch as there was a joint
decree against Nanak and Khair-ud-Din. The question
was whether the abatement of the appeal in respect
of Nanak would result in the total dismissal of the
appeal or whether the appeal of Khair-ud-Din could
still be-proceeded with. On behalf of the appellant
Khair-ud-Din the enabling provision of rule 4 of
Order XLI CPC was invoked for the contention that
the appellant should still be permitted to continue
the appeal against the decree in its entirety inasmuch
as the appeal proceeded on a ground common to
himself and Nanak. It was found that there was a
wide divergence of judicial opinion on the question
as to whether rule 4 should apply in such a case.
This gave rise to the reference to the Full Bench.

28. The Full Bench after hearing the learned
counsel for the parties came to the conclusion that
even apart from Order XLI rule 4 CPC the
abatement of Nanak's appeal docs not make
Khair-ud-Din's appeal incompetent and that the
latter's appeal can still proceed. It was, however,
observed that thé Iearned counsel for the appellant
conceded in keeping with the consistent view of that
court that rule 4 of Order XLI could not be applied
where the non-appealing plaintiff or defendant, as thé
case may be, had not been impleaded in the appeal at
all and is not before the Appellate Court.

29. This legal position is now well-settled
and it is also well-established that the provision of
this rule does not exclude the operation of the
provision of Order XXII of the Code. Hamoodur
Rahman CJ in the case of Shah Mohammad. Ys.
Mohammad Baksh PLD 1972 (SC) 321 (also
referred to in the judgment of Latifur Rahman J) in
interpreting rule 4, inter alia, observed that it
nowhere lays down that any person, who is a
necessary party to the appeal, can be excluded and
still the appeal will be properly constituted. In order
to exercise the powers given by this rule all persons
to be affected by the order must be before the Court,
it was observed. It would be totally wrong to hold,
the learned Chief Justice further said, that the
appellate Court can proceed to hear an appeal even if
the necessary parties are not before it.

30. In that case one of the defendant
appellants died during the pendency of the first
appeal and another during the pendency of the second

            
            appeal in the High Court and the Iegal
representatives of the deceased appellants were not
brought on record. The appeal was declared to have
abated as a whole at both the stages because it was
found that the 25 defendants (appellants) in the suit
were in joint possession of the house, each one of
them was a necessary party, and the death of one of
them would result in the appeal being not properly
constituted,

31. Leave was granted in that case to consider
whether the provisions of rule 4 of Order XLI CPC
should have been applied in the case and the right to
prosecute the appeal held to have survived to the
remaining appellants after the death of any one of
them. The Supreme Court found that the provisions
of rule 4 of Order XLI do not nullify the provisions
of rules 3 and 4 of Order XXII and they do not
prevent an appeal from abatement if it otherwise
stands abated. Rule 4 was found to be inapplicable in
the facts of that case but then in order to determine
the question of the abatement of the appeal as a
whole it was considered further whether the decree
was indivisible or not. Upon examining the
pleadings in the case it was found that the decree was
indivisible and each one of the appellants was a
necessary party to the appeal and in the absence of
any one of them the decree could not be varied or
altered. The death of one such party without
substitution of his heirs was, therefore, the Supreme
Court found “rightly held to have resulted in the
total abatement of the appeal."

32. The facts of the case reported in PLD
1974 (SC) 322 also cited in the judgment of my
learned brother Latifur Rahman J, are that Qazi Mehr
Din, the predecessor-in-interest of the respondents
entered into a contract with Sh. Mehr Din., the
predecessor-in-interest of the appellants, for selling
his agricultural land measuring 893 bighas on 15th
March 1926 and possession of the land was delivered
to Sh. Mehr Din on the same date. On 14th March
1938 Qazi Mehr Din filed a suit for possession of
the disputed land against the vendee Sh. Mehr Din
and fifteen others alleging that the vendee had failed
to pay the balance of the sale price as Stipulated,
This suit was decreed on 30th December, 1943 by
the District Judge of Rahim Yar Khan, the decree
was éx parte against defendant Nos. 5 to 16. Then
there is a chequered history which is not necessary
and ultimately the appeal by some of the defendants
against the said decree fell to be considered by
High Court Division of West Pakistan (Baghdadul
Jadid). The High Court dismissed the appeal for the
reason that the legal representatives of certain
defendants who were necessary parties had not been
brought on the record by the appellants with the
result that the appeal against them had abated and
that it could not proceed in respect of the Other
defendants as the interests of all the defendants in the
Suit were joint and indivisible and inconsistent
decrees in respect of the same subject matter Were
likely to come into existence if the appeal was to be
allowed in part. The Supreme Court upheld this
view taken by the High Court and observed that
once it is found that the decree appealed from by
some of the defendants was joint and indivisible
against all the defendants, then it follows that their
failure to implead the remaining defendants, or any
of them would render the appeal incompetent. The
principle underlying this rule is that otherwise
inconsistent and contradictory decrees would come
into existence regarding the same subject matter and
as a result of the same litigation.

33. From the decisions referred to above it
follows that in order to hold that an appeal has
become non-maintainable in the absence of a
non-appealing plaintiff or defendant, as the case may
be, it is necessary to give further reason than merely
saying that rule 4 does not apply. This the High
Court Division has not done in the present case. Mr.
Moinul Hug, learned advocate, appearing as amicus
curiae in this appeal, has, therefore, submitted, I
think rightly, that the High Court Division was not
justified in holding that the appeal was incompetent
and not maintainable merely upon finding that
defendant No. 2, Afroza Begum, having not been
impleaded in the appeal, rule 4 does not apply
without saying anything further as to why the
appeal cannot proceed even in spite of rule 4.

34. Mr. TH Khan, learned Advocate for
respondent No. 1, has submitted that having regard
to the frame of the suit, nature of the reliefs claimed -
and nature of the relief awarded by the decree
appealed from, defendant No. 2 was a necessary and
essential party in the appeal and without her the
appeal was imperfectly constituted and as such not
maintainable. He further submitted that the plaintiff
obtained a joint decree for specific performance of
contract against all the defendant Nos. 1-6, and


            
            defendant No. 2 having not been brought on record
and she having not filed any appeal there was
possibility of two inconsistent and conflicting
decrees if the appeal was to proceed in her absence
and as such the appeal became non-maintainable.
undoubtedly these are cogent grounds for which the
appeal may be held to be not maintainable. But
none of these grounds and their validity is found to
have been considered by the High Court Division in
its cryptic judgment. It is possible to argue in both
ways in the facts of a given case (and why not in
this case also) that in the absence of a
non-appealing plaintiff or defendant an appeal has or
has not abated or become non-maintainable as a
whole and it is for the Court to decide one way or
the other. The High Court Division has not done
this exercise at all before finding that the appeal
was not maintainable.

35. That an appeal does not become
necessarily incompetent in the absence of a non-
appealing plaintiff or defendant will be clear from the
decision of this Court in the case of Hupen Majhi
Vs, Munshi A Khair 32 DLR (AD) 96 in which it
has been observed “it is to be remembered that on
the death of a non-substituted appellant, the appeal
against him abates and it is to be taken that he has
not appealed. But under rule 4 the other defendant-
appellants are entitled to make an appeal and carry it
to conclusion. Therefore, the defendant-appellants
who were not dead could carry the appeal to its
conclusion, and since no question of two conflicting
decrees coming into existence arises, this is a fit case
where provisions of rules 4 and 33 of Order 41 of the
Code will apply.”

36. Further, even if it was found that
defendant No. 2 was a necessary party who was not
'impleaded as respondent, the court could yet
Consider, Mr. Moinul Huq, I think again rightly
Submitted, whether it would exercise its power under
rule 20 of Order XLI. Rule 20 is in the following
terms; ,

"20. where it appears to the Court at’ the
hearing that any person who was a party to the
Suit in the Court from whose decree the appeal
iS preferred, but who has not been made a party
to the appeal, is interested in the result of the
appeal the Court may adjourn the hearing to a
future day to be fixed by the Court and direct
that such person be made a respondent."


37. In this connection Mr. Moinul Huq has
particularly referred to the decision reported in 17
DLR, Dhaka 643 in the case of Mohendra Nath Vs.
Susila and submitted that the High Court Division
should or, at any rate, could have followed the
course taken in that case. It is interesting to note
that in that case which was also a first appeal, two
of the defendants were not impleaded as respondents.
in the said appeal and the objection was taken by no
one else than Mr. Moinul Huq himself that the
appeal became incompetent for not impleading the
necessary parties to it. In that case the appeal was.
filed in 1959 and the objection was raised at the
hearing of the appeal in 1965. The question of
limitation was therefore involved in adding the two
defendants against whom the appeal would be
directed (unlike in the present case). The Division
Bench upon considering the provisions of Order 1
rule 10 and Order XLI rule 20 CPC and various
decisions directed that the said defendants be
impleaded as respondents in the appeal. Murshed, CJ
observed in that decision "that the provisions of
Order XLI rule 20 are directed to serve the interest of
justice. The primary requirement is that of
dispensation of justice. It enables the Court, in
appropriate circumstances, to add parties to a
proceeding so that full justice may be done. We
ourselves feel no difficulty in construing the
language of Order 41 rule 20, to mean that if a
Court considers it to be necessary it has ample
powers to add to an appeal persons who were
originally parties to the suit if such a course is the
requirement of justice."

38. Mr. Moinul Huq has cited some other
decisions 12 DLR 745 and 16 DLR (SC) 386 in
support of his submission that under rule 20, the
Court has power in a proper case to allow a
necessary party to be added as a respondent. As to
the power of the Court to add a necessary party
whether at the stage of the suit or at the stage of the
appeal subject to law there can hardly be any doubt
and the power can be exercised suo motu. The matter
is, however, in the discretion of the Court. In the
present case it does not appear that the High Court
Division gave any attention to rule 20 before
dismissing the appeal. It may be observed that the
special facts in the case as could be considered were
that the appeal was against an ex parte decree, that
under Order IX rule 13 CPC the decree could be set
aside against all the defendants even though only one

            
            defendant had applied under the said rule and that
defendant No. 2 Afroza Begum was admittedly not an
executant of the two sale deeds which having been
refused registration by the District Registrar, the
plaintiff brought the suit.

It has been stated in the Ieave petition that an
application for addition of Afroza Begum (defendant
No. 2) as a party respondent was filed in the Court
on the day, the appeal was dismissed i.e. the Sth
March, 1989 but the said application was refused by
the High Court Division. This has been reiterated in
the concise statement of the appellants. Respondent
Na. 1 has, however, denied that any such application
was filed till the dismissal order was passed on
5.3.89. We have been shown a sworn petition for
addition of Afroza Begum in the first appeal bearing
the date 5th March 1989. However, I am not
prepared to believe that the said application was filed
in the Court before the dismissal order was passed
and even then the Court did not take notice of the
same; rather it will appear that wisdom dawned on
the appellants after the damage was done. Even so,
one feels in retrospect that had the attention of the
High Court Division been drawn to Order XLI rule
20 the matter perhaps would not have come to such
a pass and the appeal could be spared a technical
knockout.

Ed.

SUPREME Court
Appellate Division
(Civil)
Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ, | Agrani Bank
ATM Afzal J and 	    |.........Appellants
Mustafa Kamal J. 	    | Vs. 
Judgment 		    | Bangladesh Tyres Ltd and
August 29, 1990.      | Others... Respondents 

Companies Act (VII of 1913)
Sections 162, 163, 166 & 202

Winding up of a company by court
Circumstances in which winding up will be ordered
— The basis of an order for winding up a company
on the ground of its inability to pay its debts is
always insolvency. A company must be found to be
commercially insolvent when its existing and
probable assets are insufficient to meet the existing
liabilities, it is heavily indebted to various Creditors
all its assets being in mortgage or in pledge, and
there is no possible chance of a profit being made or
its business carried out.

A winding up order is called for under section 162,
Clause (vi) of the Act if the Court is of opinion that it is
just and equitable that the Company should be wound
up. Such opinion is bound to gain ground when it is
found that the substratum of the Company was gone or
its only business had become impossible. The
substratum of a company will be deemed to be gone
when (a) the subject matter of the Company is gone or
(b) ‘the object for which it was incorporated has
substantially failed or (c) it is impossible to carry on
the business of the Company except at a loss, that is,
there is no reasonable hope of trading at a profit. The
facts of the instant case. show that here is a Company
which has ceased functioning for years together, has
been in very heavy, debts to various creditors and as far
as the present appellant is concerned has not taken any
step ever since the statutory notice and thereafter over
the years for re-payment of the debts which has gone mounting. Truly, the substratum of the Company is
gone.

The Punjab Flying Club Limited AIR (1933) Lah.
301; Halsbury's Laws of England Vol. V page 397
Haven Cold Mining Co. (1982) 20 Ch. D 151 &Re.
Taldua Rubber Co. Ltd. (1946) 2 All ER 763

*Civil Appeal No, 27 of 1990. sas

(From the Judgment and Order dated 27th
February, 1990 passed'by the High Court Division
Dhaka in Company Appeal No. 17-0f 1986)


            
            M Nurullah, Senior Advocate instructed by
Shamsul Haque Siddique Advocate on Record
For the Appellant
Dr. M Zahir Senior Advocate instructed by
Md. Aftab Hossain Advocate on record For the
Respondent No.1
SR Pal Senior Advocate Supreme Court
instructed by Ataul Huq Advocate on Record For
the Repondent No.2
Khalilur Rahman Advocate on Record For the
Respondent No. 3

Judgment

ATM Afzal J: This appeal by leave, by the
Agran Bank is from judgment and order dated
27.2.1990 passed by a Division Bench of the High
Court Division, Dhaka in Company Appeal No. 17
of 1986 filed under section 202 of the Companies
Act, 1913 (hereafter called the Act) allowing the
same and setting aside those of the Company Judge
dated 27.11.86 and further rejecting the application
of the appellant-Bank under sections 162, 163 read
with 166 of the Act.

2. The appellant Bank filed the aforesaid
application before the Company Judge on 1.11.1982
being Matter No. 29 of 1982 for winding up of the
respondent No. 1 Company alleging, inter alia, that
it is Private Limited Company having its registered
office at 82, Motijheel Commercial Area and factory
at Fatullah, Dhaka and that the Company carries on’
the business of manufacturing tyres, tubes and
rubber goods. The Company opened and operated
accounts under several heads with the local Office
Branch of the appellant since pre-liberation days and
enjoyed cash credit facilities by hypothecation and
Pledge of goods. After the liberation of the country
the factory of the Company was taken over by the
Government and placed under respondent No. 3, the
Bangladesh Chemical Industries Corporation, for
management The Government thereafter released the
unit on 21.8.76 and the share-holders/Directors took
over possession of the unit from the Corporation
with all its assets and liabilities including
pre-liberation liabilities. At a meeting of the Board
of directors of the Company to the appellant-bank for
the period prior to the release of the Company was
acknowledged. The Company had issued balance
confirmation certificates dated 12.12.79 in
acknowledgement of its liabilities to the appellant
but the Company did not adjust the same despite
repeated notices and demands. The statutory notice
under section 162 of the Act dated 7.8.82 was served
by the appellant demanding Tk. 33,69,606/92 as on
28.7.82 together with subsequent interest and
charges within three weeks, but the Company
neither gave any reply nor took any step to adjust
the same. The liabilities mounted to Tk.
39,41,371.12 as on 14.10.82 and the security in
rubber goods against the same valued hardly at Tk.
3,79,500.00. The Company failed and neglected to
pay its liabilities and it appeared that the Company
was unable to liquidate the same. It has been stated
in the application that the amount of indebtedness of
the Company is much over Tk. 500.00 and the
Company is thus liable to suffer liquidation and that
it is also just and equitable that the company should
be wound up.

3. The Company opposed the petition by
filing an affidavit-in-opposition partly denying the
allegations of the appellant and contending, inter
alia, that their project having been declared as
abandoned property and taken over under the
President's Order No. 27 of 1972 and placed under
the Corporation, the shares and the project vested in
the Government which retained that character even
after the release of the same and accordingly the
provisions of winding up of a Company as resorted
to would not apply; that the appellant having
refused to deliver the pledged raw materials worth
Tk. 4,36,766.00 despite written request, caused
damage to the Company to the tune to Tk. 30 lacs;
that the Company is entitled to waiver of interest
in cash credit pledge account from 20.9.76 and in
cash credit Account-II from 4.3.80 like other
borrowers of the appellant; that the application for
winding up is malafide as there is a counter claim
for damage of Tk. 30 lacs for non-delivery of -
goods; that the claim is disputed and the appellant .
must prove its claim first by filing a money suit; ~
that the statement of account supplied by the Bank
does not show how and on what dates interest has
been calculated and that the Company should not be
wound up merely because the owners had to give an
undertaking about the acceptance of liability at the
time of release of the unit from the management of
the corporation.

            
            4. The appellant-Bank filed an affidavit-in-
reply to the aforesaid affidavit-in-opposition of the
Company. It reiterated its claim as made in the
application. It denied the claim of the Company of
Tk. 30,00,000.00 stating that it was an imaginary
claim and there was no evidence to show the alleged
liability of the Bank to the Company. It was further
Stated that they charged penal interest in view of the
circular of the Bangladesh Bank dated 25.1.1979.

5. The Company filed a further affidavit-in-
opposition on 19.11.86 stating that the title deeds of
land measuring 13 bighas in Kashimpur mouza were
deposited with Agrani Bank, Local Office, Motijheel
as collateral security against the loan given to the
Company. It was their further case that the present
value of the said 13 bighas of land would be Tk. 45°
lacs approximately.

6. In yet another affidavit-in-opposition filed
on 13.2.86 it claimed waiver of the interest during
the period of turmoil in 1971 and after
nationalization which stood at Tk. 14,25,702.00.

7. Respondent No. 2 Bangladesh Shilpa Bank
filed an affidavit before the Company Court on
17.3.83 and claimed that the Company was liable to
it for an amount of Tk. 72,58,914.09 for which they
Started Miscellaneous Case No. 107 of 1979 in the
Court of the District Judge Dhaka. There was,
however, a compromise on certain terms and
conditions and a sum of Tk. 20,09,69.00 had been
paid by the Company in liquidation of its dues. The
Shilpa Bank claimed that its loans have been secured
against mortgage, hypothecation of the project land,
buildings and machineries of the Company. It is the
largest creditor of the Company and also a secured
creditor. It prayed that if the Company were to be
liquidated, then their dues being the first charge
should be satisfied first, ,

8. Respondent No, 3 the Chemical Industries
Corporation also filed an Affidavit contending, inter
alia, that it hadn invested in the business of the
Company Tk. 29,42,980.61 upto 13.6.76 on behalf
of the Government; that at the time of release of the
factory an agreement dated 16.9.76 was executed by
the Company whereby they had acknowledged the
aforesaid investment and unconditionally agreed and
undertook to repay the same in instalments, but
failed to pay a single instalment and consequently
the outstanding dues rose to Tk. 39,91,843/201: that
the Corporation filed Money Suit No. 40 of 1980
for recovery of the said sum and Money suit no.
244 of 1982 for subsequent dues of Tk. 1736075.63
in the 3rd Court of Subordinate Judge, DhAKA
against the Company which are still Pending

9. The learned Company Judge by his
judgment and order dated 27.11.86 found that the
Company was unable to pay its debts, that it had no
bonafide defence, that the debt is not in fact disputed
and that it is just and equitable that the company
should be wound up. Accordingly the application
was allowed and direction given for the winding up
of the company. On the basis of the said order the
Official Liquidator took over possession of the
project and assets of the Company on 10.7.88

10. The respondent Company, however, filed
an appeal, Company Appeal No. 17 of 1986
against the judgment of the learned Company Judge
and a Division Bench of the High Court Division
Dhaka heard the said appeal and by the impugned
Judgment and order dated 27.2.90 allowed the same
and set aside the order of winding up as already
noticed.

11. Leave was granted to consider whether the
appeal against the winding up order was allowed
upon a correct appreciation of the facts and
principles of law relating to such proceeding.

12. Mr. M Nurullah, learned counsel for the
appellant, has submitted that the learned Judges of
the Appellate Court were wrong in holding that a
"bonafide dispute over the claims of the petitioner
Bank very much exists in the present case" in that
the said finding has no basis whatever and overlooks
Annexure 'A' and 'C' series to the petition for
winding up and the same is thus wholly untenable.

13. Dr. M Zahir, learned counsel for the
respondent Company, on the other hand, has
Submitted that the Company having pleaded
strenuously that it was in fact paying off the debts
of the bank but the bank was charging for goods not
delivered or not usable by the Company as per
annexure 'X" to the affidavit in opposition) the claim
of the bank is bonafide disputed. He also submitted
that the claim of the bank based on its calculation of
interest being seriously challenged, the bank's claim
as made is a disputed debt for which the Company
should not be wound up.

14. It may be recalled that the outstanding
dues of the company according to the appellant bank


            
            stood at tk 39,41,371.12 on 14.10.82. The
company put up a counter claim of Tk.
30,00,000.00. the Iearned Judges of the Appellate
Court themselves found that this counter claim of
Tk. 30,00,000.00 could not be accepted because
damage has not been proved by any evidence on
record. It is just an allegation made in the counter
affidavit and no evidence has been placed before the
Court is support of such counter claim."

15. The learned Judges, however, found that
the appellant bank was not entitled to claim as a
matter of right the interest amounting to Tk,
14,25,702,00 against the Company for the period of
turmoil and from the date of taking over of the
company by the Government till the date of its
release it was also found that at the relevant time
goods worth about Tk. 3 lacs and odd were pledged
to the bank, Upon deducting the aforesaid amount of
interest and the value of the pledged goods it was
found that the claim of the appellant bank came to
1k. 21 lacs and odd approximately.

16. It has been argued by Mr. Nurullah that
the learned Judges of the Division Bench travelled
beyond their jurisdiction in holding that the
appellant bank was not entitled to the interest during
the period of turmoil and control of the industry by
the Government. It seems that the argument has
substance as the Company had little scope to dispute
unilaterally the claim of interest made by the bank
after having itself admitted the correctness of the
claims made by the bank vide Annexure 'A' and 'C'
series to the petition for winding up. There is no
finding cither by the learned Company judge or by
the appellate Court that any payment was ever made
by the Company in liquidation of its debts to the
appellant bank. No credibility, therefore, can be
attached to the oral submission of Dr, Zahir that the
company had been paying off its debts and there
existed bonafide dispute as to the outstanding
amount Which according to the bank remained in
arrear. He also Submitted that the acceptance of
correctness of accounts by the Company as furnished
by the banks should not be given much importance
because the industries are often forced to admit such
accounts for fear of stoppage of cash flow without
which the industries cannot be run. Such admissions
on the part of a Company are likely to be used as
weapons of economic blackmail by a bank if a
winding up preceding were to be permitted upon
such admission alone without requiring the bank to
prove its claim in a civil Court, he submitted. It is
nowhere the Company's case that the acknowledge-
ments of the bank's claims were made under duress
and not voluntarily nor there is any finding by either
of the courts in that behalf. In such circumstances
we do not see any basis whatever for the learned
Judges of the Division Bench to hold that a bonafide
dispute exists over the claims of the appellant bank
and as such the said finding cannot be sustained.

17. Mr. Nurullah next argued that the learned
Judges of the Division Bench were wholly wrong in
holding that the outstanding dues of the bank has
been sufficiently secured and as such no order for
winding up of the Company was warranted. Dr.
Zahir, however, supported the said finding and
submitted further that if the Company were allowed
even today to run its business, the Company may
sell or mortgage part of its assets and arrange to pay
off the creditors as it had arranged during the
pendency of the appeal in the High Court Division.
He submitted that part of the land assets at the
factory at Fatullah alone being 8 bighas (which is
not a locked asset) it was sufficicnt to cover all the
debts of and claims against the Company.

18. The Division Bench in considering
whether the debts of the appellant bank (which was
taken to be Tk. 21 lacs and odd) have been secured to
its satisfaction observed that the Company in its
further affidavit filed in the Company Court on
19.11.86 stated that the tithe deeds of lands
measuring 13 bighas in Kashimpur mouza had been
deposited with the appellant bank as collateral
security for the company and the value thereof was
approximately Tk. 45 lacs. The court also found
substance in the contention made on behalf of the
Company that 8 bighas of factory lands at Fatullah
although hypothecated to the Shilpa Bank were
worth taka several crores and it was a sufficient
security for the outstanding dues of the appellant
bank.

19. In the concise statement the appellant -
bank has stated that the respondent Company did
neither offer nor mortgage with the appellant bank
any property, not to speak. of 13 bighas of land at
Kashimpur or at any other place as stated in the
further affidavit dated 19.11.86. It has been further
asserted that the statement regarding deposit of the
title deeds in respect of the said land as collateral

            
            security is wholly false. No rejoinder is found in the
concise statement of the respondent Company: to the
said assertion nor has anything been pointed out
from the record in support of the Company's case of
deposit of idle deeds as alleged. Some reference has
been made in this connection to the affidavit filed by
the hank in connection with a talk of compromise
during the appeal stage. There is nothing to show
that the bank particularly admitted the alleged
mortgage of Kashimpur lands by the Company.

20. It must be said that the Iearned Judges in
considering the appeal against an winding up order
totally failed to keep in view the central question as
to whether the Company was commercially
insolvent, because the basis of an order for winding
up a company on the ground of its inability to pay
its debts is always insolvency.

21. In the case of the Punjab Flying Club
Limited AIR (1933) (Lahore) 301 it has been noted
that "it is settled law that what the Court has to see
in a case like this is whether the company is
“commercially insolvent", i.c., whether it is unable
lo meet its current demands, although the assets
when realised including uncalled Capital exceed its
liabilities (Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. V, p.
397) as observed by Lord Wrenbury:

"in such a case it is useless to say that if
the assets of the company are realized there will
be ample to pay 20 shillings in the pound : this
is not the test. A company may be at the same
lime insolvent and wealthy. It may have wealth
locked up in investment not presently realizable
but although this be so, yet if it has not assets
available to meet its current liabilities it is
commercially insolvent and may be wound up;
(Buckley's Law and Practice under the
Companies Acts p 364)."

22. A Company must be found to be
commercially insolvent when its existing and
probable assets are insufficient to meet the existing
liabilities, it is heavily indebted to various creditors,
all its assets being in mortgage or in pledge, and
there is no possible chance of a profit being made or
its business carried out.

23. It has been noticed how heavily the
Company has fallen into debts not only to the
appellant, but also to the Shilpa Bank and the
Chemical Industries Corporation. It appears that the
much vaunted asset of factory lands is mortgaged
with the Shilpa Bank and are not Presently realisable
to meet the current liabilities of the Company. It
also appears that it could not take advantage of the
easy terms upon which the appellant bank had agreed
to compromise the matter with the Company during
the appeal, vide affidavit of the Appellant pages
141-146, There is nothing on record to show that
the Company at the relevant time had a reasonable
hope of attending the job of manufacturing its
products at a profit. On the other hand, it has been
alleged that the business of the Company Stands
suspended continuously for several years ang |
truck loads of its machineries have been sold away
by the Company stealthily during the night
following 24.3.86 during the pendency of the
winding up proceeding. It has further been alleged
that the Company does not have its registered Office
now at 82 Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka or, at
any other place, The Company, it is said, also did
not hold any annual general meting for Several
years and did not file the statutory returns in the
office of the Registrar, Joint Stock Company,
Bangladesh. It has also been asserted that the
Company does not have any other business or
source of income to repay its debts and liabilities,
Dr. Zahir has not been able to repudiate these
assertions by placing such facts as would inspire
confidence in the viability and vitality of the
Company. Rather from the facts and circumstances
of the case it becomes clear that on the date of filing
of the winding up petition the respondent Company
could not present a picture that it was a
commercially viable organization and since then
there is nothing to show that there has been any
improvement in the image of the Company. The
Present facts as could be gathered indicate that it has
been rendered into a wholly moribund organisalion
without any glimmer of survival. A winding up
order is called for under section 162, Clause (vi) of
the Act if the Court is of opinion that it is just and
equitable that the Company should be wound up
Such opinion is bound to gain ground when it is
found that the substratum of the Company was gone
or its only business had become impossible. Re.
Haven Cold Mining Co, (1982) 20 Ch. D 151; re
Taldua Rubber Co, Lid, (1946) 2 ER. 763)
The substratum of a company will be deemed to be
gone when (a) the subject matter of the Company is
gone or (b) the object for which it was incorporated


            
            has substantially failed or (c) it is impossible to carry
on the business of the Company except at a loss, that
is there is no reasonable hope of trading at a profit.
the facts of the instant case show that here is a
company which has cased functioning for years
together has been in very heavy debts to various
creditors and as far as, the present appellant is
concerned has not taken any step ever since the
statutory notice and thereafter over the years for
re-payment of the debts which has gone on mounting.
truly, the substratum of the Company is gone.

for the reasons stated above, we do not think
that the learned Judges of the Division Bench have
acted properly and correctly in overturning the
decision of the learned Company Judge. In the result,
therefore, the appeal is allowed without any order as
to cost. The impugned judgment is set aside and the
order of the learned Company Judge restored.
Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)

Shahabuddin       |  Dr. Naimur Rahman and
Ahmed CJ, MH      | another..............+. Appellants
Rahman J, ATM     | in CA No. 58/1984
Afzal J, Mustafa  | Vs.
Kamal J and	      |  Shahbazpur Tea Co. Ltd and
Latifur Rahman J. | another...............Respondents
			| in CA No. 58/1984*
Judgment- 		| Dr. Naimur Rahman and
June 19, 1990.    | “another......Appellants
			|in CA No. 59/1984
			|Vs.
 			|M/s. Rama Tea Co. Ltd. and
			|another...........++ Respondents
			|in CA No. 59/1984*

Companies Act (VII of 1913)
Section 162
Plea for winding up of a company—Company
Judge is competent to dispose of winding-up petition

Civil Appeal Nos. 58 and 59 of 1984.
(From the Judgment and order dated 21.4.1983
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Matter
Nos. 27 and 28 of 1982),

summarily on affidavits and counter-affidavits of
parties. Company Court has inherent power to stay
all further proceedings sine die for the ends of justice
when such petition is malafide having been made for
a collateral purpose and the same is an abuse of the
process of the court. Order staying winding-up
petition sine die amounts to rejection of such
petition. It is not legally permissible to reopen the —
matter on the grounds as contained in the existing
petition—New facts cannot be incorporated by
amending the existing winding up petition. Revival
of the present petitions are uncalled for—Filing of
fresh winding up petition will depend on new or
continuing causes of action.

Amin Scales Ltd & another Vs. Md. Yakub 1987
BLD (AD) 259 & Suleka Works Ltd, AIR 1965 (Cal) 98.
Ref.

Syed Ishtiag Ahmed, Senior Advocate,
instructed by Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-
Record— For the Appellants. (Both the appeals)

Dr. Kamal Hossain, Senior Advocate, instructed
by Kazi Shahabuddin Ahmed, Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondents. (Both the appeals)

Judgment ©

Latifur Rahman J: These two appeals by
special Ieave at the instance of two share-holders and
directors are directed against the judgment of a
Company Judge passed in Company Matter Nos. 27
and 28 of 1982 arising out of. applications for
winding up of two Tea Companies under section
162 of the Companies Act, 1913.

2. The applications for winding up were filed
on the grounds, amongst others, that the substratum
of the respondent companies is lost, that Respondent
No. 2 by his unauthorised and illegal acts and
omissions reduced the companies to a proprietary
concern, that no annual general meeting of the
Companies was held since 1976, that no
balance-sheet and/or profit and loss account have at
all been prepared and audited, that no Statement of
Accounts was furnished to the share holders, that
respondent No. 2 was running the affairs of the
companies by-passing the Board of Directors in the
name of an illegally constituted Executive
Committee, that the companies’ funds had been
diverted to the personal gain of respondent No. 2 and
that thereby the companies defaulted in paying the

            
            loans incurred in the name of the companies. Hence,
itis just and equitable that the companies should be
wound up.

3. The said applications for winding up were
admitted on 14.10.82 and the learned Company
Judge fixed the matter for hearing on 9.12.82 and
granted temporary injunction restraining respondent
No. 2 from creating further liabilities for the
companies. Respondent No. 2 entered appearance on
2.11.82 and prayed for vacating the order of ad
interim injunction and the order was modified
slowing respondent No. 2 to incur certain liabilities
in order to run the companies. Thereafter again two
applications were filed by Respondent No. 2 on
29.11.82 for summary rejection of the winding up
applications and/or restraining the appellants from
continuing with the winding up applications. In
these applications respondent No. 2 alleged that the
applications for winding up were filed by the
appellants with a malafide motive to prevent the
companies from acquiring back the shares of Pubali
Jute Mills Lid., pursuant to the decision of the
Government to de-nationalise the said Mill published
in the Bangladesh Gazette on 27.9.82 which the
companies were entitled as original Bangladeshi
share-holders, All material allegations made in the
winding up applications were denied by respondent
No. 2 and he set up a counter-allegation stating that
the appellant No. 1 acquired a Tea Garden in his own
name and lost all interests in the companies’ affairs
and business and as such the Board of Directors in
pursuance of their power given under clause 17(g) of
the Articles of Association formed the Executive
Commitee and the companies were being run by the
Committee smoothly. The applications were
malafide just to put pressure upon the respondents.

4. The learned Company Judge after hearing
the parties and considering the affidavits and
counter-affidavits filed in these cases, held that no
prima facie Case was made out for winding up of the
companies and consequently disposed of the
applications for summary rejection of the winding
up petitions und stayed all further proceedings sine
die, Against that order of the learned Company
Judge, these Iwo appeals by leave have been heard
together and will be disposed of by this judgment,

5. Leave was granted to consider whether the
learned Company Judge has got powers to
summarily dispose of applications for winding up on
the basis of affidavits and counter-affidavits of the
parties, and whether the Company Court can stay all
further proceedings sine die if it appears to the Court
that the application is male fide and Made for a
collateral purpose.

6. Mr. Syed Ishtiaq Ahmed, Iearned Advocate
appearing for the appellants submits that the learned
Company judge fell into scarious error of law in
Staying sine die all further proceedings of winding
up petitions without taking oral evidence ang going
into the merit of the cases. The learned advocate
further submits that the learned Company Judge also
wrongly held that the applications of winding up
were not bona fide and the same was made for
collateral purpose inasmuch as the appellants were
not given the opportunity to substantiate their
allegations by adducing oral evidence.

7. From the tenor of argument of Mr. Syed
Ishtiaq Ahmed it appears that since the applications
for winding up were admitted by the learned
Company Judge, the order of staying all further
proceedings sine die on the basis of applications for
summary rejection is unwarranted in law and fact. At
the outset it is to be stated that the Company Court
in exercise of its inherent power can make at any
stage of the proceeding such order for stay of
application for winding up on the ground that the
winding up petition is an abuse of the process of the
Court. This power to stay all further proceedings on
the aforesaid ground and in certain other
circumstances has been well-recognised and well-
established by the decision of this Court and other
courts. This power to make such orders for the ends
of justice to prevent abuse of the process of the
Court has been expressly recognised in the case of
Amin Scales Limited & another Ys. Md. Yakub
reported in 1987 BLD (AD) 259 wherein it has been
held by Shahabuddin Ahmed, J. as His Lordship
then was, as follows :

"For, even after admission of the
application, if the Court finds from materials
Submitted before it that there is a bonafide
dispute regarding the debt or intention of the
petitioner seeking winding up is mala fide, such
as to pressurise the company into Een
to an unjust demand, or where the proceeding
Started is a clear abuse of the process of the
Court, then the Court has got inherent
jurisdiction to stay further proceedings till the


            
            dispute is adjudicated in a proper forum. The
Court has also got inherent power to stay
further proceeding “for ends ‘of justice”
irrespective of the fact that the application was
rightly admitted for hearing”.

8. Further, in the case of Suleka Works Ltd.,
reported in AIR 1965 Calcutta 98 it has been very
elaborately laid down that the Company Court has
the jurisdiction to stop winding up petition on the
ground that it is an abuse of the process of the
Pt In that decision it has further been held that
to deny such power to the Court is tantamount to
allowing a frivolous and mischievous winding up
application to proceed without any power of the
Court to stop the proceeding.

9. Thus, the learned Company Judge was
invested with the power to stay the proceeding sine
die, and we are to see whether he acted judicially and
correctly in the facts of the present case. From the
materials on record the learned Company Judge found
that the Government policy of disinvestment
encouraged the appellant to file these applications for
winding up without offering any explanation for
silence for about six years and on the merit of the
case, the learned the Company Judge held that there
was hardly any materials to hold that Companies
have failed to carry out their objects and that the
assets of the companies are not sufficient to satisfy
the bonafide claim of the creditors. The learned
Company Judge on consideration of the affidavits
and counter-affidavits filed by the parties held that
the petition for winding up was not a bonafide one
and the same was made for collateral purpose. Thus,
the learned Company Judge was prima facie satisfied
that the applications were not bonafide and stayed the
applications sine die. The applications for winding
up being a very serious matter, the learned Company
Judge in the circumstances noticed by him, which
we find to be relevant, rightly passed the impugned
order for which no lawful grievance can be made.
hence, the first point raised by the learned Advocate
for the appellant is of no merit.

10. It may be mentioned that this order of
staying the applications for winding up sine die
amounts to rejection of the applications. Mr. Syed.
Istiaq Ahmed, argued that the appellant should be
given an opportunity ‘to argue the matter before the
learned company Judge. It will not be permissible
in law to re-open’the matter on the basis of the
Statements and grounds as contained in the
winding-up applications as the applications are
strictly confined to the grounds expressly taken in
these petitions and in those circumstances it is
difficult within the framework of the present
applications for winding up to proceed with the
same after a lapse of 8 years. Even new facts cannot
be incorporated by amendment in the existing
applications for winding up and on that score as well
the revival of these applications is not called for.

11. If the appellants, however, feel that as of
today new or continuing grounds and materials exist
for filing fresh applications for winding up, the
appellants can do so on new or continuing causes of
action. The prayer for revival of the old applications
for fresh consideration upon evidence, in our
opinion, will not serve any useful purpose.

12. In the result, these appeals are dismissed
with the observation made above. In the facts and
circumstances of the case there will be no order as to
costs.

. Ed

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Civil)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,     | 
MH Rahman J, ATM          | .................- Appellant
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J  | Vs.
and Latifur Rahman J. 	  | Mohammad Yeasin
Judgment 			  | Mazumder and others......
August 29, 1990. 		  | ......Respondent*

Village Courts Ordinance (LXI of 1976)
Sections 3 and 8

Code of Civil Procedure (Y of 1908)
Order VII rule 11

Unanimous decision of a Village Court under
challenge in Civil Court—Whether plaint could be
rejected in view of finality of decision of the Village
Court—In the face of allegation in the plaint that
the respondents did not nominate their representa-
tives in the Village Court the plaint cannot be
rejected. To determine the truth of this allegation

*Civil Appeal No. 58 of 1985.

(From the judgment and order dated 3.12.1984
passed by the High Court Division, Comilla Bench, in
Civil Revision No. 12 of 1984).

            
            evidence is necessary and this can be available only
in the course of trial of the suit, .............(7)

Khondkar Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior
Advocate, Supreme Court Mahbubey Alam,
Advocate, Supreme Court with him), instructed by
Sajjadul Hug, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Appellant.

Abu Sayed Ahmed, Advocate, Supreme Court,
instructed by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-
Record — For the Respondent Nos. 1-3.

Dead substitution exempted vide order dated
4.3.87 — Respondent No. 14,

Ex parte — Respondent Nos. 4-13 & 15.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: In this appeal the
Only question is whether a suit challenging the
unanimous decision of a Village Court, constituted
under the Village Courts Ordinance, 1976, is
maintainable on the ground of "coram non judice"
when the said Ordinance has made a unanimous
decision final. Facts Ieading to this question are
given below.

2. The appellant had filed Case No. 12 of
1980 in the Village Court No. 6 of Jaganathpur
Union Parishad against the respondents claiming
damage for destruction of his Aush crop. The Village
Court was apparently constituted with the required
five members including two representatives of each
of the two parties and the Chairman. The
respondents had, however, contended that the case
against them was a mere counter-blast to a criminal
proceeding under section 144 CrPC filed by them
against the complainant (appellant) in respect of the
same land in which they claimed title and
possession. The Village Court, by a unanimous
decision dated 16 May 1980, allowed the
complainant's case and awarded him compensation of
Tk. 100.00 from each of the respondents. Since a
unanimous decision or a decision by majority of four
to one, of the Village Court is final and binding
upon the parties the respondents filed Title Suit No.
675 of 1980 in the 3rd Court of Munsif, Comilla,
for a declaration that the decision of the Village
Court was void on the ground of malice on the part
of the Chairman. The defendant-appellant filed an
application under Order VII, rule 11 Civil PC, for
rejection of the plaint taking the ground that the suit
was not maintainable as the impugned decision was
unanimous. The learned Munsif rejected the
application refusing to reject the plaint taking the
view that some sort of "appellate forum" was
necessary, particularly when the writ jurisdiction of
the High Court Division was under Suspension at
the relevant time. This order of the Munsif was
challenged in revision (CR No. 12 of 1984,
Comilla) but the learned Single Judge of the High
Court Division, by his order dated 3.12.1984
refused to interfere observing, among other things
that the Village Court had "surreptitiously passed
the award for damage", no matter their decision Was
unanimous.

3. Leave was granted by us to examine the
question whether the plaint of the suit ought to have
been rejected in view of finality of the decision of
the Village Court.

4. Kh, Mahbubuddin Ahmed, learned Counsel
for the appellant, has referred to the judgment of the
trial Court namely, the Munsif, particularly, his
observation that some kind of "appellate forum"
must be there to challenge the unanimous decision.
of the Village Court. The learned Counsel has
pointed out that "appellate forum" has been provided
in the Ordinance but appeal is limited to cases where
the Village Court's decision is by majority of three
to two members. He has referred to section 8 of the
Ordinance which provides that if the decision of the
Village Court is unanimous or by majority of 4 to
1, then it is final. The learned Counsel has argued
that appeal is the creation of statutes and when the
statutes did not create any appellate forum the Court
cannot create it; the view taken by the trial Court is
palpably erroneous, the learned Counsel has further
argued.

5. Section 3 of the Ordinance has conferred
exclusive jurisdiction on the Village Court in all
cases relating to offences specified in Part I, and in
all civil matters, specified in Part II of the schedule
of the Ordinance. There is no dispute that the offence
alleged against the respondents fell with the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Village Court. & as
the record apparently shows, the impugned decision"
of the Village Court is unanimous and this decision
is final. But there is no express provision in the
Ordinance barring the jurisdiction of a Civil suit to
question the legality or propriety of any decision of


            
            the Village Court. Sub-section (3) of section 8
provides that-
"Notwithstanding anything contained in any
Order law for the time being in force, any matter
decided by a Court in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance shall not be tried in
any Court including a Village Court.”

This indicates ouster of jurisdiction of any Court in
any matter which has already been decided by the
Village Court.

6. Mr. Abu Sayed Ahmed, learned Advocate
for the respondents, contends that even if the Civil
court's jurisdiction is ousted by a law, still the
civil Court got jurisdiction to sce whether the
tribunal concerned, such as the Village Court, was
duly and properly constituted, that is, according to
the provisions of the statute, here, the Ordinance or
whether’ the tribunal followed the procedure laid
down in the statute. Reliance is placed on a decision
of this Court in Rafiqul Alam Vs.. Mostafa Kamal
and others, 42 DLR (AD) 137. In that case we had
referred to an observation of the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council in the case of Secretary of State
Vs. Mask and Co., 44 CWN 709, and held that in
spite of the provision of the statute barring Civil
Court's jurisdiction in a case it still got power to see
whether the tribunal was constituted according to law
or whether it had followed the provisions of law and
observed the fundamental judicial procedure or
whether it acted bonafide.

7. In the instant case the respondents’
contention is that the Village Court was not
constituted with five. members according to the,
Provisions of the Ordinance which requires two
members from each party, besides the Chairman of
the Union Parishad. In their plaint of the suit they
alleged that they did not nominate any representative
but it is the Chairman, who, out of previous enmity
and grudge, brought two of his men and showed that
that they had been nominated by the respondents whereas
they alleged they did not nominate any
representative. Kh. Mahbubuddin Ahmed has
however produced before us a copy of the Order-sheet
of the Village Court which shows that the
respondents had nominated two representatives. But
at this stage it is the plant of the suit which is the
only record before the Civil Court and it is on the
basis of the Plaint that the Civil Court is to see
whether Suit is barred by any law or whether it is
not otherwise maintainable. The plaint shows that
the respondents did not nominate their
representatives; but the defendant-appellant pressed
for rejection of the plaint. In the face of the
allegation in the plaint that the plaintiffs-
respondents did not nominate their representative in
the Village Court the plaint cannot be rejected. To
determine the truth of this allegation, evidence is
necessary and this can be available only in the
course of trial of the suit which is prima facie
maintainable. The view taken by the trial Court that
some kind of appellate forum must be provided for,
is not correct; but we are upholding its decision on a
different ground, as stated above.

In the result; the appeal is dismissed without,
however, any cosf.

Ed.
SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)
MH Rahman J, ATM    | Abdur Rahim @ ANM
Afzal J, Mustafa    | Abdur Rahim............
Kamal J and Latifur | ......... Petitioner
Rahman J. 		  | Vs.
Judgment 		  | Enamul Huq and another...
May 2, 1991. 	  |.......................Respondents*

Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 415 :

Prosecution for cheating—Plea of civil liability—
The sum and substance of the complainant's case is
that the accused realised a total sum of Tk. 50,000.00
from the complainant on a promise to secure him a
highly paid job in Abu Dhabi. The point canvassed
on behalf of the accused in support of his application
under sec. 561A CrPC was that the liability, if any,
was of a civil nature for which no prosecution would
lie. Since according to the petition of complaint the
accused totally denied receipt of any sum from the
complainant, the question of civil liability does not
arise                         ..................(2,3 & 6)

*Criminal Petition for leave to Appeal No. 26 of
1991.
(From the Judgment and order dated 24.2.91
passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka in Criminal
Revision No. 226 of 1991).

            
            Superior Court Tradition
Narrating facts of the case—Judges are to digest
the materials and summarise them in the judgment.

We record our strong disapproval of the manner in
which the learned Judges of the High Court Division
described the prosecution case in the two complaint
cases. They have quoted in full the petitions of
complaint in Bengali. The superior Courts of this
country have a tradition of narrating facts of the case in
their own language, summarising them as concisely as
possible. Vernacular materials are translated into the
language in which the judgment is written. Same is the
case with the narration of FIR, charge-sheet, (where
necessary) deposition of witnesses, etc. The learned
Judges are required to digest these materials and to
summarise or paraphrase relevant and essential portions
thereof in as short, succinct, concise and factual manner
as possible. Lest it develops into an infectious practice
we like to nip this unhealthy trend in the bud.

Sultan Ahmed, Advocate instructed by Mad.
Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Petitioner.

Not Represented — Respondents.

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J : A Division Bench of the
High Court Division, Dhaka by the impugned
judgment summarily rejected the accused-petitioner's
application under section 561A CrPC for quashing
the proceeding of Criminal Case No. 22(CR) of
1991 under sections 406 and 420 of the Penal Code
pending against the accused-petitioner in the Court
of Upazila Magistrate, Bogra.

2. The sum and substance of the complainant-
respondent's case against the accused-petitioner is
that the latter realised on 25.8.89 a sum of Tk.
38,000.00 from the complainant on a promise to
secure for him a highly-paid job in Abu Dhabi. In
February 1990 the complainant paid him a further
sum of Tk. 12,000.00 but later on the accused-
petitioner completely denied having received any.
money from the complainant. The accused-petitioner
thus cheated the complainant on holding out a false
promise of securing a job for him and mis-
appropriated Tk. 50,000.00 on inducing a false belief
in him by deception.

3. The application under section 561A CrPC
was filed on the averments, inter alia, that the facts
disclosed in the petition of complaint do not
constitute any offence of cheating as defined under
section 415 of the Penal Code. The High Court
Division rightly held that the offence has been
clearly disclosed in the petition of complaint.

4. It had also been alleged that the Present
petition of complaint is a counterblast to an earlier
criminal case filed by the accused-petitioner against
the complainant-respondent which is pending for
trial before the Upazila Magistrate, Bogra.

5. The High Court Division has rightly held
that these facts are to be placed before the trial Court
for consideration and that a criminal Proceeding
connot be quashed on this ground.

6. The last point canvassed before the High
Court Division was that the liability, if any, was of
a civil nature for which no prosecution would lie,
Since, according to the petition of complaint, the
accused-petitioner totally denies receipt of any sum
from the complainant-respondent, the question of
civil liability does not arise.

7. The self-same points have been urged in
this Court by Mr. Sultan Ahmed, learned Counsel
for the accused-petitioner, and we have found that
the
points have been rightly repelled by the High Court
Division. .

8. But before parting with this case we record
our strong disapproval of the manner in which the 
learned Judges of the High Court Division described
the prosecution cases in the two complaint cases
involved. They have quoted in full the petitions of
complaint in Bengali. The superior Courts of this
country have a tradition of narrating facts of the case
in their own language, summarising them as
concisely as possible. Vernacular materials are
translated into the language in which the judgment
is written. Same is the case with the narration of
FIR, charge-sheet, (where necessary) deposition of
witnesses, etc. The learned Judges are required to
digest ‘these materials and to summarise or
paraphrase relevant and essential portions thereof in
as short, succinct, concise and factual manner as
possible. Lest it. develops into an infectious practice
we like to nip this unhealthy trend in the bud.

The petition is dismissed.

Ed.
            SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

MH Rahman J, ATM    | Samirun Nessa ..........
Afzal J and Mustafa | ....... First party-Appellant
Kamal J. 		  | Vs.
Judgement 		  | Kamaluddin and another ......
May 23, 1991 	  | Second party-Respondents*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Sections 439, 439A & 561A

propriety of exercising jurisdiction under section
561A CrPC to quash Magistrate's order drawing up
proceeding under section 145 CrPC—As the High
Court Division's revisional jurisdiction is concurrent
with that of the Sessions Judge and although the
High Court Division could decline to interfere for
not moving the Sessions Judge, the interference that
has been made cannot be said to be without
jurisdiction. Jurisdiction under section 561A CrPC
is not ousted in the presence of the revisional
jurisdiction of the Sessions Judge under section
439A of the Code. The only question will be has
any case been made out either under section 439 or
561A of the Code? The answer will vary from case
to case.

Sections 145 & 146

Dispute as to possession of land—Attachment
to continue until Civil Court's decision on title—
The parties are litigating their title, as also
possession in a Title Suit. It is for them to raise all
the questions therein. All comments, observations
and findings of the Magistrate in the proceedings
under section 145 CrPC and of the High Court
Division while disposing of the application ‘under
section 561A with regard to the title and
possession of the disputed property (the subject-
matter of the proceeding under section 145 CrPC)
will be ignored by the Civil. Court while deciding
the title suit. it will be fit and-proper, in the facts
and circumstances of _the..case,. to. keep the
Magistrate's order directing the receiver to. hand over
possession of the case land to the 1st party of

*(Criminal Appeal No. 12 of 1991.
(From the Judgement and order dated 7.3.91
passed by the High court Division, Dhaka in criminal
Revision No. 265 of 1988).

section 145 proceeding in abeyance for the present
and it is so ordered. It is further ordered that pending
disposal of the title suit the disputed land will
remain under attachment and the Ist party is to hand
over possession thereof to the receiver. On receipt of
judgment in the title suit, the Magistrate shall
dispose of the proceeding before him in conformity
with the decision of the Civil Court. —...... (20)

TH Khan, Senior Advocate, MA Wahhab Miah,
Advocate with him, instructed by Abu Backkar,
Advocate-on-Record — For the Appellant.

‘Abdul Malek, Senior Advocate instructed by
Shamsul Hoque Siddique, Advocate-on-Record —
For the Respondent No. I.

Md. Nowab Ali, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Respondent No. 2 (State).

Judgment

Mustafa Kamal J: This appeal by Icave is
by the first party Samirun Nessa arising out of a
proceeding under section 145 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, shortly the Code challenging
the judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court
Division, Dhaka dated 7.3.91 passed in Criminal
Revision No. 265 of 1988 quashing the judgment
and order dated 25.6.88 passed by the Metropolitan
Magistrate, Dhaka in P Case No. 383 of 1987 under
section 561A of the Code.

2. Claiming by a petition dated 1.9.87 before
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka, that the
case land, namcly, more or less two bighas of land
under PS Tejgaon, District Dhaka on CS plot No.
533, corresponding to SA plot No. 1348 and RS
plot No. 2630, is the property gifted to her by* her
father, the first party-appellant alleged breach of
peace over possession thercof by the second
party-respondent and prayed for drawing up a
proceeding under section 145 of the Code, for
attachment and for appointment of a receiver. It
should be noted that the appellant described the case
land in terms of CS plot No. 533. No proceeding
was drawn up on that petition. But the second party
was asked to show cause why it should not be drawn
up. On 4.10.87 the second party filed a written
statement in paragraph 5 whercof he stated that he
was not at all connected with CS plot No. 533 or
SA plot No. 1348 or RS plot No. 2630. After
acquisition the Government converted the acquired

            
            lands into industrial plots and industrial plot No.
170 (north) was allotted to the Kamal Press of the
second party. There is an under-construction single-
storied pucca shed measuring 120' x 30' on the said
plot and in which the darwan of the second party-
respondent resides. This plot is butted and bounded
on all sides by pucca boundary walls. The second
party-respondent has filed Title Suit No. 502 of
1987 in the 2nd Court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka
for permanent injunction restraining the defendants
permanently from interfering with the second party's
possession in respect of the said industrial plot No.
170 (north). The husband and children of the first
party-appellant are defendants in the said suit and
they are under an order of ad-interim injunction
pending hearing of the temporary injunction matter.
The said defendants filed written objection on
25.7.87 and the order of ad-interim injunction was
subsisting till 18.11.87. It may be noted that the
suit land in TS No. 502 of 1987 was described in
terms of industrial plot No. 170 (north). There was
no mention of any corresponding CS plot number. It
was further stated in the written statement that the
first party-appellant obtained an ex parte decree in
respect of the case land against the Government of
Bangladesh in Title Suit No. 208 of 1984 from the
1st Court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka and the
Government has instituted Miscellaneous Case No.
4 of 1984 under Order 9, rule 13, CPC which is
pending. The second party contended that the
proceeding "was not maintainable as there were two
pending civil suits in the matter. The second party
claimed to be in continuous and uninterrupted
possession of industrial plot No. 170 (north) from
7.8.63 for 24 years last past."

3. The case records were sent to the court of
another Metropolitan Magistrate on 4-10-87 and the
learned Magistrate fixed 18-10-87 for steps. On
5-10-87, an off-date, the first party-appellant filed a
special application for drawing up proceeding under.
section 145 of the Code. The learned Magistrate drew
up the proceeding in the absence of the second
party-respondent, giving as one of the reasons the
fact that the second party disclaimed any connection
with CS plot No. 533 or SA plot No. 1548 or RS
plot No. 2630 in his written statement. The case
land was attached and the Officer-in-Charge. of
Tejgaon police station was appointed the receiver
thereof.

4. The second party-respondent filed a written
objection and on 18.1.88 he moved the learned
Magistrate for review of the preliminary Order dated
5.10.87 which was rejected after hearing on 18.1.88
He did not take any further steps in the matter
Thereafter the first party-appellant examined 5
witnesses and the second party-respondent examined
15 witnesses in support of their respective case of
possession and by a judgment and order; dated
25.6.88 the learned Magistrate found (a) that the
second party-respondent could not establish the
connection of industrial plot No. 170 (north) with
CS plot No. 533 or SA plot No. 1548 or Rs plot
No. 2630 which is the case land; (b) that the first 
party-appellant was not a party to Title Suit No, 
502 of 1987: and (c) that the first Party-appellant ;
was in possession of the case land. The learned
Magistrate upon these findings directed the receiver
to hand over possession of the case land to the first
party-appellant.

5. The second party-respondent moved the
High Court Division under sections 561A and 439
of the Code of Criminal Procedure against the said
judgment dated 25.6.88. A Rule was issued to show
cause why the said judgment shall not be quashed or
set aside "on the finding that the proceeding under
section 145 of the Code, in the said P Case No. 383
of 1987, was without jurisdiction" and also why |
Status quo as prevalent on 5.10.87 should not be
restored. The Rule, therefore, was concemed with the
merit of the preliminary order, not with the merit of
the final order.


6. In a lengthy judgment the High Court
Division found ‘that the case land was not
de-requisitioned, as the release order dated 20.2.50
(Annexure-'A') shows fraudulent insertion of CS
plot No. 533 by interpolation. The appellant also
obtained no title to the case land by the ex parte
decree obtained by her in TS No. 208 of 1984. The
Civil Court was already in seisin of the disputed
land by issuing an order of status quo and therefore
the learned Magistrate acted without jurisdiction in
drawing up the proceeding under section 145 of the
Code. The judgment of the learned Magistrate dated
25.6.88 was quashed and the appellant was directed
to hand over possession of the case land to the
second party-respondent.

7. Leave was granted to consider whether the
High Court Division wrongly exercised its

            
            jurisdiction under section 561A of the Code when
the order dated 25.6.88 passed by the learned
Magistrate was revisable by the Sessions Judge
under section 439A of the Code. This question need
need not detain us for long as the High Court Division's
revisional jurisdiction is concurrent with that of the
secessions Judge (which was also invoked in the
present case) and although the High Court Division
could decline to interfere for not moving the
sessions Judge the interference that has been made
cannot be said to be without jurisdiction. Further,
jurisdiction under section 561A is not Ousted in the
presence of the revisional jurisdiction of the
sessions Judge under section 439A of the Code. The
only question will be, has any case been made out
either under section 439 or S61A of the Code? The
answer Will vary from case to case.

8. The second point on which leave was
 granted is whether the High Court Division had any
occasion to exercise its jurisdiction under section
561A of the Code when the impugned order dated
25.,6.88 was a final order passed on the conclusion of
a proceeding and when there was no proceeding
pending.


9. The second party-respondent challenged the
final order dated 25.6.88 on the ground that the
preliminary order dated 5.10.87.was passed without
jurisdiction and therefore all orders subsequent to the
preliminary order will fall through. The fact that the
second party suffered the preliminary order and
submitted to the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan
Magistrate in filing written objection and examining
Witnesses in support of his case will always be a
stong ground for not entertaining such petitions
under section 561A of the Code and it will also be a
Persuasive factor for the High Court Division in
favour of not exercising its jurisdiction under section
561A when it is found that the aggrieved party took
no steps at all or took only half-measures (in this
case an abortive review application) against the
preliminary order, but no hard and fast rule can be
laid down to cover all situations. It will always be a
matter of consideration, case by case, as to whether
there are compelling reasons for interference with the
preliminary Order after the aggrieved party has
acquiesced In it and submitted to the Magistrate s
jurisdiction. Needless to say, submission of a party
in a Court wrongly assuming jurisdiction does not
confer Jurisdiction. on the Court, but once a:
Submission has taken place, the Court should be
Slow to interfere and shall interfere only on strong
grounds, not on mere technicalities. The reasons for
not interfering under section 561A will equally
apply if it were a revision only.

10. The nature of the Rule issued by the High
Court Division may again be noticed. The final
order dated 25.6.88 has been assailed, not because of any defect or error of procedure committed by the
Magistrate in conducting the proceeding or because
of misreading of evidence given during the
proceeding, bat because the preliminary order was
without jurisdiction. According to the respondent, it
was without jurisdiction specially because in a prior
civil suit pending in respect of the same subject
matter the Civil Court had already issued an order of
status quo upon the partics and so the Criminal
Court must stay its hands in the matter. The
appellant's contention is that the case land and the
suit land have not been proved to be the same and.
that she was not a party to the suit when the
preliminary order was passed.

11. Within the framework of the Rule issued,
the High Court Division's inquiry was therefore
necessarily confined to the question as to whether on
the date of drawing up of the preliminary order on
5.10.87, the Magistrate had materials in his hands to
conclude that the case land was the subject-matter of
a civil suit between the parties and that the appellant
being a party to the suit was under an order of status
quo from the Civil Court. -

12. Hearing Mr. TH Khan, learned Counsel
for the appellant and Mr. Abdul Malek, learned
Counsel for the respondent, we find that on 5.10.87
when the learned Magistrate drew up the preliminary
order the respondent's written statement was before
him and the learned Magistrate noted in the
preliminary order, as a reason for drawing up the
proceeding, that the respondent disclaimed all.
connection with the case land. The respondent may
really not have knqwn whether his industrial plot
No. 170 (north) was previously CS plot No. 533 or
not, as the allottees of Government plots are
generally oblivious of genealogy of plots. But the
learned Magistrate has to go by pleadings and not by
surmises. There was even no assertion by the
respondent in his written statement that it is CS
plot No. 533 which was acquired and replotted into
“industrial plot No. 170 (north). Therefore on the day

            
            that the preliminary order was passed there was no
material for the learned Magistrate's satisfaction that
the case land in P Case No. 383 of 1987 and the suit
land of TS No. 502 of 1987 are the same.

13. Mr. Abdul Malek submits that if from the
evidence produced later before the Magistrate the
High Court Division finds that the case land and the
suit land are the same, the preliminary order can be
interfered with. But in that case the respondent
should have challenged the final order on its own
merit on the ground, inter alia, that evidence on
identity of land had been misread or not considered.
That is not the respondent's grievance. Even in his
written objection, filed before the Magistrate after
the proceeding was drawn up, the respondent repeated
his assertion that he had no connection with CS plot
No. 533. He did not make any categorical assertion
that CS plot No. 533 was converted into industrial
plot No. 170 (north) and that the case land and the
suit land of Tide Suit No. 502 of 1987 are the same.
By his judgment dated 25.6.88 the learned Magistrate
came to a clear finding that the respondent failed to
prove that his industrial plot No. 170 (north)
emanated from CS plot No. 533. In fact the
respondent has filed as late as on 9.5.91 an
application for amendment of the plaint of Title Suit
No. 502 of 1987 praying for incorporation of CS
plot No. 533 in the schedule.

14. The High Court Division, we find, has
not determined the identity of the case land, nor was
its function to do so within the framework of the
Rule issued. The findings of the judgment dated
25.6.88 were not under challenge. Yet the High
Court Division quite unnecessarily assumed that CS
plot No. 533 after acquisition and replotting became
industrial plot No. 170 (north). The High Court
Division has not referred to any evidence in support
of its assumption. The High Court Division made
an uncalled for investigation of its own as to
whether CS plot No. 533 after acquisition was
released from acquisition and held that the order of
release in respect of plot No. 533 (Annexure 'A’) was
interpolated, thus unnccessarily prejudicing the
appellant in the prosecution of the pending suit and
Proceeding. The High Court Division has also made
an uncalled for observation that the appellant
obtained no title in the case land and that the ex parte
decree obtained by her in TS No. 208 of 1984 did
not confer any title on her. These inquiries and
observations were wholly outside of the scope of the
Rule. The High Court Division never directed its
attention to the central question as to whether on the
date of drawing up of the preliminary order, the
learned Magistrate had any material for his
satisfaction that the case land and the suit land are
the same. We find that he had no such Material.
There the matter should have ended insofar as the
scope of the Rule was concerned. There was
therefore, no basis for the finding of the High Court
Division that a civil suit was pending between the
parties in respect of the same subject matter When
the learned Magistrate assumed jurisdiction under
section 145 of the Code.

15. The second question is, whether on the
date of drawing up of the preliminary order, there
was any material before the Magistrate that the
appellant herself was a party to TS No. 502 of
1987. From the papers filed: by the appellant it is
found that the said suit was filed by the respondent
originally on 9.7.87 against seven Persons,
including the husband and sons of the appellant, but
not against the appellant Samirun Nessa. Samirun
Nessa was added as defendant No. 8 only on 7.5.88.
The ad-interim order of status quo having expired in
the meantime, the respondent filed a fresh
application. for passing an order of status quo in
respect of the suit land and the learned Subordinate
Judge directed the parties to maintain status quo by
his order dated 7.5.88 fixing 25.6.88 for steps and
hearing of the injunction matter. On 26.6.88 the
respondent filed talabana for issue of the order of
status quo dated 7.5.88 and the appellant received the
notice on 29.6.88, whereas the final order in the
proceeding under section 145 of the Code was passed
on 25.6.88.

16. From the papers submitted to us there iS
no escape from the conclusion that the appellant was
not a party to Title Suit No. 502 of 1987 prior to
7.5.88. The second party stated in his written
statement filed on 4.10.87 that TS No. 502 of 1987
was filed against the children of the appellate and
that the husband and children of the appellant have
filed a written objection on 25.7.87 upon receipt of
a notice of ad-interim injunction. It was not even the
respondent's own case that the appellant was a party
to the suit. The learned Magistrate had no material
on 5.10.87 to come to a conclusion that the
appellant was a party to TS No. 502 of 1987.




            
            17. The discussion above answers the last
question on which Ieave was granted. The High
Court Division exceeded its jurisdiction under
Section 561A of the Code by recording erroneous
findings on matters and documents touching upon
question of title to the grave prejudice of the
appellant. it did not address itself to the central
questions involved in the Rule. It travelled beyond
the Rule and made observations on papers and
documents which were not before the Magistrate
when he drew up the preliminary order.

18. Mr, TH Khan submits that the High
Court Division did not and indeed could not within
the terms of the Rule issued reverse the finding of
the learned Magistrate that the appellant was in
possession of the case land, yet it passed an order
directing the appellant to hand over possession of the
case land to the respondent.

19. We do not see how this order can be
passed without there being a challenge to the
findings of fact of the learned Magistrate in his final
order and without a reversal of the same.

20. We find, however, that the parties are
litigating their title, although incidentally, as also
possession, in Title Suit No. 502 of 1987 in the 2nd
Court of Subordinate Judge, Dhaka. It is for them to
raise the question therein as to whether CS plot No.
533 was acquired and re-plotted in part or full into
industrial plot No. 170 (north), whether the said CS
plot was released from acquisition and other related
questions, as also the question of possession. All
comments, observations and findings learned
Magistrate and the High Court Division with regard
to the title and possession of the disputed property
will be ignored by the Civil Court while deciding
the Said title suit. It will be fit and proper in the
facts and circumstances to keep the, learned
Magistrate order dated 25,6.88 in abeyance for the
present and it is so ordered. It is further ordered that
pending disposal of Title Suit No. 502 of 1987, the
case land of P case No. 383 of 1987 will continue
to remain under attachment and the officer-in-charge
of Tejgaon police station is to remain as the receiver
thereof the party-appellant is directed to hand
over possession of the case ‘land to the receiver
within 7 days from the date’ of drawing up of this
Judgement. The learned Magistrate on receipt of the
Judgement in TS NO: 502 of 1987 of the 2nd court of
Subordinate Judge, Dhaka’ shall proceed to and
dispose of P Case No. 383 of 1987 in conformity
with the decision of the Civil Court.

Subject to the above orders and directions, the
appeal is allowed.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division

(Civil)
MH Rahman J, ATM 		| Modern Shipping Agencies
Afzal J, Mustafa 		| ........+ Plaintiff-Appellant
Kamal J and Latifur     | Vs.
Rahman J. 			| Central Inland Water Trans-
				| port Corporation Limited
Judgment 			| and another........
March 24, 1991. 		| ....Defendant-Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (V of 1908)
Or. IX r. 13

Setting aside decree passed ex parte—Order of
remand for considering the question of limitation—
In the instant case no question of limitation was
mooted or discussed by the trial Court and hence it
could not be said that by restoring the case the
delay was impliedly condoned. When a matter is
sent back and the superior Court in its discretion
directs that the parties -be given'an even opportunity
to place their respective cases such discretionary
order should not ordinarily be interfered with unless
it causes a serious prejudice to one of the
contending parties.

Mian Kamal Din Vs. Malik Muhammad Bashir PLD
1952 Lahore 456; Ahsan Ali & others Vs. District
Judge and Settlement Commissioner, Sukkur and others
21 DLR (SC) 139 = PLD 1969 SC 167; Chowdhury
Saifuddin Ahmed Vs. Shamsuddin & others 40 DLR
(1988) 10; Mt. Kulsoomun Nissa and another Vs. Noor
Mohammad @ Sultan Haider and another AIR 1936
(Allahabad) 666; Firm Kaura Mal Vs. Firm Mathra Dass
AIR 1959 (Punj) 646; Mohammad Yousuf Vs. Member,
Board of Revenue, West Pakistan, Lahore & 6 others
1970 SCMR 70 discussed. ss (4,6-8, 10 & 11)

*Civil Appeal No. 67 of 1986.

_(From the Judgment and order passed by the
High Court Division, Chittagong, Bench, dated
4.11.1985 in Civil Revision No. 241 of 1984).

            
            SR Pal, Senior Advocate, instructed by
Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Appellant,

Syed Ishtiag Ahmed, Senior Advocate, Supreme
Court, instructed by Md, Wahidullah, Advocate-on-
Record — For the Respondents.

Judgment

MH Rahman J: The appellant, M/s. Modern
Shipping Agencies, instituted Moncy Suit No. 94 of
1980 in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Third
Court, Chittagong against the respondents.
Respondent No. 1, Central Inland Water Transport
Corporation Limited, defendant No. 2 in the suit,
entered appearance on 28th Nomvember, 1980 and
filed as many as eight applications for time for filing
written statement. The last application for time, filed
on 8th April, 1982, was rejected, there being no one
to move that application. Thereafter the defendants
did not take any step nor did they file any written
statement. The suit was decreed ex parte on 18th
November, 1982. On 30th March, 1983 respondent
No. 1 filed an application under Order 9 rule 13 for
selling aside the ex parte decree.

2. Respondent No. 1's case for setting aside
the ex parte decree is that they entered appearance in
the suit through Mr. AM Rashiduzzaman, Advocate,
who once informed them that time had been granted
by the court for filing the written statement, but the
company did not receive any other or further
information from him and was under an honest belief
that their learned Advocate would inform them about
the date of filing of the written statement.
Subsequently on a query they came to learn that 8th
April, 1982 was fixed for filing written statement
and an application for further time for filing written
statement was rejected as there was no one to move
that application. The suit was fixed on 22nd June,
1982 for service return on defendant No. 1. The
plaintiff filed an application in this regard and on
23rd June, 1982, and it was ordered that the matter
be put up on 26th June, 1982 and both the parties be
informed, but the Iearned Advocate of respondent No.
1 was not informed. By a further order dated 24th
August, 1982 the plaintiff's application with regard
to service of summons on defendant No. 1 was
ordered to be put up on 28th August, 1982 with
intimation to both the parties, but no such
information was given to the respondent's learned
Advocate, On 28th August, 1982 the Plaintiff's
prayer in respect of service of summons on defendant
No. 1 was allowed. Subsequently on 19th
September, 1982 the suit was filed for ex parte
disposal on 18th November 1982. Respondent No.
1's learned Advocate Mr, Rashiduzzaman Went to be
Untited Kingdom in April, 1982. As the directions
of the Court for informing the parties with regard to
two different dates 26th June, 1982 and 28 August
1982 were not complied with the developments 
the suit could not be known to respondent No, 1's
Advocate. After inspection of the record the
respondent came to know on 2nd March, 1983 about
the ex parte decree and filed the Miscellaneous case
No. 14 of 1983 on 30th March, 1983.

3. The trial Court allowed the Miscellaneous
Case. On the plaintiff's revisional application, Civil
Revision No. 241 of 1984, the High Court Division
remanded the case to the trial Court for Considering
the question of limitation after giving the Parties
reasonable opportunity of being heard and examining
witnesses if they so liked. Respondent No. 1 was
allowed to file an application for condonation of
delay if so advised. ,

4. The appellant contends that the respondent
had duly appeared before the Court after receiving the
summons and the decree was passed ex parte against
them long thereafter and their application for Setting
aside the decree after the expiry of 30 days from the
date of the ex parte decree was time-barred under
Article 164 of the Limitation Act, 1908. In support
of their contention the appellant relied on Mian
Kamal Din Vs. Malik Muhammad Bashir, PLD
1952 Lahore 456 wherein it was held that once a
party receives intimation of an action it is for him
to pursue it and to keep himself in touch with the
Proceedings, either personally or through his
counsel.

5. It is contended that the High Court
Division was wrong in remanding the case to the
trial Court since respondent No. 1 did not apply for
condonation of delay as provided in amended
provisions of Order 9, rule 13 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. It is further contended that as there was
no application by respondent, No. 1 for condonation
of delay under section 5 of the Limitation Act the
trial Court was not called upon thereof to consider
the question of delay and it did not in fact address

            
            itself to that question but the High Court Division
even after noticing this aspect of the matter illegally
remanded the matter for giving an opportunity to
respondent No. 1, particularly when they failed to
keep watch over the proceedings in the suit for more
then seven months after rejection of their ninth
application for time to file a written statement.

6. The appellant has drawn our attention to the
 following observation made in Ahsan Ali & ors. Vs.
District judge and Settlement Commissioner Sukkur
and others 21 DLR (SC) 139=PLD 1969 SC 167.

"It has also been held by this Court in
several cases that mere disposal of the appeal on
merits is not sufficient to lead to the inference
that the delay must have been condoned. There
must be something in the order or judgment
itself to show that the Court concerned was
conscious of the fact that the proceeding was out
of time and had applied its mind to the question
of limitation before dealing with the proceeding
on merits."

7. The respondents, on the other hand, contend
that section 5 of the Limitation Act itself does not
postulate making of a separate and independant
application for condonation of delay. In support of
this contention they have cited Chowdhury Saifuddin
Ahmed Vs. Shamsuddin & ors 40 DLR (1988) 10
wherein it was held that "The section lays stress on
satisfying the court that the appellant or. applicant
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or
making the application within the statutory period.
It does not say that the only medium through which
the Court can be satisficd is by way of a separate
application".

8. In that decision a reference was made to Mt.
Kulsoomun Nissa and another Vs. Noor Mohammad
alias Sultan Haider and another, AIR” 1936
(Allahabad)t 666, where Sulaiman, CJ did not
approve of a dismissal of appeal as. time-barred
merely on the ground that the appellant had not made _
a formal application for extension of time under ,
section 5 of the Limitation Act, and also to Firm
Kaura Mal Vs..-Firm Mathra Dass, AIR’ 1959
(Punjab) 646 wherein it was’ held that "Merely
because there was no written application filed by the
appellant is hardly a sufficient ground for refusing
him the relief, if he is otherwise entitled to it.” 
application for setting aside the ex parte decree the
reasons for delay in filing the Miscellaneous Case
were explained and as such there were sufficient
materials on record, and that the High Court
Division did not commit any illegality in
remanding the case to consider the question of
limitation,

10. The respondents have also placed reliance
on Mohammad Yousaf Vs. Member, Board of
Revenue, West Pakistan, Lahore & 6 others, 1970
SCMR 170. In that case the Pakistan Supreme
Court after considering the aforementioned case of
Ahsan Ali and others Vs. District Judge and others
upheld the High Court's view that the appellate
Court impliedly condoned the delay when the
question of limitation was specifically brought to
the notice of the appellate authority and in spite of
that he allowed that appeal by deciding it on merits.

11. In the case of Ahsan Ali and others Vs.
District Judge and others on which the appellant has
placed much reliance the Supreme Court remanded
the matter to the Additional Settlement Commi-
ssioner for the disposal of the appeal in accordance
with law after giving the parties adequate
opportunity of representing their respective cases and
adducing evidence both on the question of limitation
as well as the question of fraud. The ratio in that
case, as brought in focus in Mohammad Yusuf's
Case 1970 SCMR 170, is that the authority
concerned should be conscious of the question of
limitation before deciding the proceeding pending
before it. Though section 5 of the Limitation Act
does not provide for filing of a separate and
independent application for condonation of delay it is
desirable for the convenience of the Court and the
contending parties that such an application should be
filed explaining each day of delay otherwise the
question of limitation or condonation of delay can
not effectively be mooted and determined, and it will
be difficult for the contending parties to join issues
and adduce evidence in the matter. Where such an ©
application is not filed the court may, however,
condone the delay if it is satisfied on other materials
on record that there was sufficient cause for not
preferring the application or the appeal within the
prescribed period of limitation. In the instant case no
question of limitation was mooted or discussed by
the trial Court and hence it could not be said that by
restoring the case the delay was impliedly condoned:


            
            In that view of the matter, the question of delay
must be enquired into and, in fitness of things, it is
to be done by the trial Court. When a matter is sent
back and the superior Court in its discretion directs
that the parties be given an even opportunity to
place their respective cases such discretionary order
should not ordinarily be interfered with unless it
causes a scarious prejudice to one of the contending
parties. In the facts of the case the High Court
Division's order docs not suffer from any infirmity.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. No costs.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
Appellate Division
(Criminal)

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ,     | The State....... Appellant
MH Rahman J, ATM 		  | 
Afzal J, Mustafa Kamal J  | Vs.
and Latifur Rahman J.     | Khasru @ Syed Mostafa
Judgment 			  | Hossain and another......
November 8, 1990. 	  | Accuscd-Respondents*

Evidence Act (1 of 1872)
Sections 3 & 5
Circumstantial evidence—Its conclusiveness—
assessment of evidence—This is a case in which a
minor boy, the victim of murder, was called away by
and seen in the company of the two young accused
for the last time before disappearance and then some
time thereafter the body of the victim was found out.
The fact of calling away of victim Khairul by
accused Khasru was satisfactorily established as the
first circumstance in Support of the prosecution and.
witnesses have also satisfactorily proved that the
Victim travelled with the two accused from their
village Noapara to a distant place called Takerhat by
bus and got down there at 4-00/4-30 PM on 4.1.79,
This is the second circumstance proved against the
accused. From this point. onward upto the time of
recovery of the body of Khairul at about 3-00/3-30
PM on the following day the accused were alleged to
have been seen along with the the deceased, the third
circumstance in the absence of ocular evidence of


*Criminal Appeal No. 21 of 1986.
(From the Judgment and Order dated 27th July
1983 passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka
Bench in Criminal Appeal No. 137 of 1980).


murder, by PWs 11 & 12. The High Court Division
rejected their evidence due to apparent contradiction
between their evidence and the statement Made by
them before the police and also for the reason that
their identification of the accused in the TI Parade
had lost all significance in view of the fact that they
had chance to see the accused. There has been no
violation of any norm or procedure in assessing the
evidence of the said two witnesses for Which the
finding of fact made by the High Court Division
could be disturbed. The position therefore Comes to
this that the third circumstance, that of, Seeing the
three boys together near the bank of the river where
the victim's body was found was not Satisfactory
established. The circumstances of the case can Never
be said to be conclusive as to the guilt of accused
Khasru and his brother Nowab. The High Court
Division has correctly applied the rule as to
circumstantial evidence in the facts of the present

case.—Per ATM Afzal with whom Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ
and MH Rahman J concurred.

The case of Shamsuddin Sarkar 11 DLR (SC) 365;
Erada and others Vs. The State of Hyderabad PLD 1965
(SC) India 286; Ismail Sarkar and others Vs. The State
33 DLR 320 & Ghulam Rasul @ Pattan Vs. Emperor 107
IC 1928 page 774 relied. The case of Deonandan Mishra
(1955) SCR 570 Vol. 2 distinguished.
             ................... (4, 5, 23,25-28)

Per Mustafa Kamal J(concurring with minority
view) : My own view is that the prosecution case can
well rest on the two circumstances held to have been
satisfactorily proved by my learned brother ATM Afzal J.
The prosecution story need not travel beyond Tekerhat
and beyond 4-00/4-30 PM of 4.1.79. My first reason
for holding so is that Khairul Alam's deadbody was
recovered not from a far-away place, but from only
about half a mile from Tekerhat where the deceased was
last seen with the accused. The deceased did not travel
far from where he was last seen alive. There is no
evidence that he was killed elsewhere and his dead body
was planted in the mustard firld only about half a mile
away from Tekerhat to throw suspicion on the accused.
My second reason is that the deceased was killed not
many hours after 4-00/4-30 PM of 4.1.79. after
alighting from the bus at 4-00/4-30 PM the deceased
was taken-only half a mile away and he was done to
death very soon after sunset. This conclusion is
consistent with the medical evidence on record. The
margin of error in calculation of the approximate time
of murder is only 3-4 hours. and the error is in favor of
the prosecution case. The time gap betwee the
deceased's last being seen alive and the commission
of

            
            murder is so short that the possibility of an intervening
circumstance is almost nil in this case. In the facts and
circumstances of this case there is absolutely no
possibly whatsoever that the accused had parted
company with the deceased. A minor boy of about 9/10
years has ventured out of his house in the company of
older boys travelled some distance away from his home
by bus and landed himself in an unknown place when the
sun is about to set. He is not a grown-up man. He
cannot part company with his known companies and
pick up other acquaintances in an unknown place when
darkness set in. His age and the circumstance of his
arrival at Tekerhat militate against the possibility of
such happening. He cannot be on his own. The two
acccused-respondents did not offer any explanation what
happened to Khairul after they reached Tekerhat. They
raised the plea of alibi in support of which they did not
adduce any evidence. Taken all the circumstances
together, the circumstantial evidence is incompatible
with the innocence of the accused and incapable of
explanation upon any other reasonable hypothesis than
that of the guilt of the accused: Each case of
circumstantial evidence must be decided on the given
facts and circumstances and applying the said test I hold
that the prosecution has proved its case beyond
reasonable doubt against accused respondent Ng. 1
Khasru, although on the reasons stated by my learned
brother Latifur Rahman J I would give benefit of doubt
to accused-respondent No. 2 Nawab. ...... (40-43 & 47)

Per Latifur Rahman J (minority view) : In the facts
of the present case when no motive had been alleged by
the prosecution, I do not give much importance to the
argument of the learned Advocate for the respondents. I
also do not think that failure of mentioning about a
motive is material in this case, particularly when a
minor boy of a school was done to death by another
elderly school boy. Today, crimes are committed for
very insignificant thing which it is difficult to
comprehend in a rational mind. If I consider individual
circumstance such as going from the house, travelling
by bus being seen at the place of occurrence in
isolation and, divorced from the context of the case, that
may not appear to be very important. But when these
various circumstances are considered conjointly, it leads
to no other conclusion than this that the crime was
committed by Khasru alone. With regard to the case  accused Nawab Ali, there is no evidence that‘Nawab Ali
called the deceased from his house. Since one of the
identifying witnesses could not identify accused Nawab
Ali, I am Inclined to give benefit of. doubt to. this
accused. On " Consideration of the circumstances: as. a 
whole I have come to the conclusion, that the High
Court's acquital Order so far it relates to accused-
respondent is based on unsubstantial and
irrelevant considerations which will be apparent from
the discussions made above, Consequently, the acquittal
order of accused Khasru is set aside and the judgment of
the trial Court is restored in respect of this respondent
alone, Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in’ part
Judges of the High Court Division took note of some
decisions regarding circumstantial evidences. I clearly
hold that those cases are distinguishable from the facts
of the present case and the learned Judges of the High
Court Division wrongly relied on those decisions in
acquitling accused Khasru, sae 75, 77-79)

Evidence Act (I of 1872)
Section 8

Murder charge resting on circumstantial
evidence—Accused's motive in calling out and
accompanying the victim boy—There is absolutely
no material on record to show that anybody had at
any stage expressed any suspicion that the accused
might have had any evil motive in calling out the
victim. All that the father said at the trial was that
the motive for murder was to give him pain, This is
no motive. He did not say why.the young accused
would cause him pain. There is also no material to
suggest even that there might have been some
immediate and on-the-spot reason for the accused to
cause violence to the victim or that they were acting
at some others' behest—Per ATM Afzal J with
whom Shahabuddin Ahmed CI & MH Rahman J
concurred. seve (31)

AW Bhutiyan, Additional Attorney-General,
instructed by B Hossain Advocate-on-Record — For
the Appellant.

Abdul Malek, Senior Advocate, instructed by
Sharifuddin Chaklader, Advocate-on-Record — For
the Respondents.

Judgment

Shahabuddin Ahmed CJ: I have gone
through the judgments written by my learned
brothers ATM Afzal and Latifur Rahman, JJ; 1:
concur with the judgment of ATM Afzal, J.

MH Rahman J: I have read the draft
judgments of brothers ATM Afzal and Latifur
Rahman, JJ; I concur with the decision of ATM
Afzal, J.

ATM Afzal J: This appeal by Ieave at the

            
            instance of the State is from an order of acquittal
under sections 302/109 Penal Code passed in favour
of the respondents by the High Court Division in
appeal,

4. Ivis one of those cases in which the victim,
in the present case a minor boy, is called away by
and seen in the company of the accused for the last
time before disappearance and then some time
thereafter the dead body of the victim is found out.
More often than not, ocular evidence of murder is
not available and these cases thus rest. on
circumstantial evidenee, As far as the law is
concerned, it is now well-settled, to put it in the
words of Munir CJ, PLD 1950 Lahore 288 (FB)
That “to find a man guilty of a criminal offence on
circumstantial evidence, the facts proved must all be
consistent with the theory of his guilt’ and
incompatible with the theory of his innocence. This
is a statement of the rule in the abstract logical form
but as applied by the law courts, the rule may be
Stated to be, that no man is to be found guilty on
circumstantial evidence unless the circumstances
established against him are such that no reasonable
hypothesis other than that of his guilt can be built
upon them."

5. The learned Chief Justice sitting in the
Supreme Court in later years considered a case, that
of Shamsuddin Sarkar, Appellant, IJ DLR (SC)
365, which bears striking resemblance to the facts of
the present case. There, as here, two boys in their
teens were charged under sections 302/109 for
abetting the murder of a minor boy, Muzammal in
nearly similar circumstances. One boy was convicted
in a trial by Jury and his appeal was summarily
dismissed by the High Court. In acquitting the
accused the learned Chief Justice deprecated the view
of the Sessions Judge when in his address to the Jury
he said that if the evidence of PWs 1-3 (proving
taking away and seeing last time together) was
believed and if the intention was proved then the
accused would be liable. The learned Chief Justice
observed "There was not the slightest warrant for
this inference and the right course for the judge to
adopt should have been to direct the Jury seriously to
apply their minds to the question whether if the
evidence of PWs 1-3 was true, it was not reasonably
possible that the deceased might have been murdered
by someone else without the accused knowing
anything about it."

6. This case and some other Cases have been
relied upon by the High Court Division in recording
the order of acquittal in the present case, It will be
for our ultimate consideration in this appeal whether
the principle relating to circumstantial evidence as
referred to above has been correctly followed in the
facts and circumstances of the present case.

7. As for the facts, the prosecution Cagg
briefly, is that the victim, Khairul Alam, a Student
of class Hand aged about 9/10 years was the SON of
PW 1, Abdus Sattar Khalifa of village Noapara, Ps
Bhanga, District Faridpur. The two respondents
aged respectively about 14 and 16 years, who were
on trial along with their father Syed Motazza
Hossain (since acquitted by the trial Court) are full
brothers and close neighbours of the victim boy,

8. On 4.1.79 corresponding to 19th Poush,
1385 BS PW 2 Selim (13), a student of Class VII
of Bhanga High School at about 2-00 or 2-30 py
was playing volleyball with deceased Khairul Alam
and other boys in the field to the cast of respondent
No. 1 Khasru's house when Khasru called deceased
Khairul Alam to take plum. Thereafter Khairol
Alam went away with Khasru. PW 1 Sattar Khalifa
States that on that day i.c. on 4.1.79 at about 2-45
to 3-00 PM Khasru took away his son Khairul -
Alam from his house. Khairul Alam was wearing a °
half shirt (Ext. 1), sponge sandal (Ext. II) and a half
pant which was not found when the dead body was
subsequently recovered. PW 8 Baten, a student of
Class VIII, saw Khasru and Khairul Alam on that
day going towards the Noapara bus stand. PW 4,
Munsur, PW 5 Karim, PW 6 Jalil and PW 7 Jinnat
Ali saw Khasru, Nowab (Respondent No. 2);
deceased Khairul Alam and PW 9 Mintu boarding
the Faridpur-Takerhat bus at the bus stand at about
4-00 PM on that date. PW 9 Mintu travelled on that
day in the same bus with deceased Khairul Alam and
the- two respondents. All of them got down at
Takerhat. The respondents told PW 9 Mintu that
they were going to hear songs. Thereafter PW 9.
Mintu crossed the river and went away. PW
Shajahan Bepari and PW 12 Sekander Bepari of or
Prasannadi: Mouza, PS Muksudpur saw In ie
evening of that day three boys. including t
deceased. PW 11 Shajahan Bepari saw the decoy
with two other boys (one of whom was identific
him in the TI parade as respondent Nowab) ne
bank of the river Kumar at about 4-00/4-30 PM

            
            PW 12 Sekandar Ali also saw the two older boys
(whom he identified in the TI Parade as Khasru and
Nowab respondents) with the deceased on the bank of
the said river at about sunset hour. Thereafter nobody
knew what happened to Khairul Alam.

9. Finding that Khairul Alam did not return
home till evening PW 1 Abdus Sttar Khalifa went
in search of his son to the house of Khasru but did
not find respondents in their house. None in the
thouse of Khasru could tcll where they had gone? Khasru's uncle Syed Mortuza also could not tell the
whereabouts of Khairul Alam and Khasru.

10. On the next day ic. on 5.1.79 at about
2-30 or 3-00 PM, PW 11 Shajahan, PW 12
Sekandar Ali, pw 13 Kashem and PW 19
Shahabuddin saw an assembly of persons on the
northern bank of Takerhat, they went there and saw
the dead body of deceased Khairul Alam in the
mustard field. PW 13 Kashem and PW 19
shahabuddin Ahmed wrote a petition (Ext. 2) and
filed the same at Sindhiaghat floating police outpost.
pw 22 Sub-Inspector Atior Rahman, attached to
sindhiaghat police outpost received the petition
(Ext. 2) and made GD entry No. 89 dated 5.1.79. He
held inquest on the dead body of Khairul Alam at
4.5 PM on 5.1.79 on the identification by PW 14
Kazi Wahed alias Dintu, and six others.

11. PW 1 Abdus Sattar on receipt of
information that a dead body of a minor boy had been
found at Takerhat sent his men including PW 14 Kazi
Wahed and his another son Nannu (since dead) who
came back to Noapara at about 9-00 PM and informed
PW I Sattar about the recovery of the dead body of
Khairul Alam. PW 1 could not go to Takerhat during
the night as bus was not available then.

12. On 6.1.79 PW 1 Abdus Sattar left for
Takerhat by bus at about 9-00/10-00 AM and
reaching Sindhiaghat police outpost saw the dead
body of his son which was then taken to Faridpur
Written oe ama examination. PW 1 filed a
Sindhiaghat P to PW 22 SI Atior Rahman at
OC Muksug Olice outpost which was addressed to
inestigated Pur PS and sent there. The case was
Rawshan « Parly by PW 22 and then PW 23 SI
sumitted che after completing investigation
yy UBe-sheet on 25.6.79.

13. pw 17 Dr. Jamiruddin Ahmed, Assistant
Surgeon, Faridpur Jail Hospital held autopsy on the
dead body of Khairul Alam at 1-30 PM on 6.1.79
and found seven penctrating injurics cach measuring
1/4” in diameter on the front part of the neck. He
opined that the death of the deccased was duc to the
aforesaid injurics which were antc-mortem and
homicidal in nature and were about 47 or 48 hours
old.

14. At the trial the respondents and their
father were charged, on ‘the above facts, under
sections 302/109 Penal Code to which they pleaded
not guilty.

15. The defence taken was that the deceased
was a bad boy and he used to mix with other bad
boys. He used to go out from his house taking
money. The respondents were not in any way
connected with Khairul's murder but they were
falsely implicated in this case by interested persons
in collusion with the witnesses, many of whom had
litigation with the respondents’ family.

16. The prosecution examined 21 witnesses
and tendered 2 but the defence did not examine any
witness. The defence case was put to the matcrial
witnesses which they denicd.

17. The learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Faridpur who held the trial, by his judgment and
order dated 29.4.80 found the respondents guilty and
sentenced them to transportation for life. Their father
was, however, acquitted on benefit of doubt.

18. On appeal by the respondents, a Division
Bench of the High Court Division, Dhaka, by the
impugned judgment and order dated 27.7.83,
acquitted them of the charge and allowed the appeal.

19. The State being aggrieved by the said
order of acquittal prayed for leave to appeal from the
impugned judgment and leave was granted to
consider the submission that "the order of acquittal
was passed on discarding the evidence and on
misappreciation of the evidence of PWs 11, 12, 13
and 19 which are sufficient to establish the guilt of
the accused persons."

20. We have heard the learned Additional
Attorney-General for the State in support of the
appeal and Mr. Abdul Malck, Senior Advocate for
the respondents and gone through the record.

21. I shall deal with the submissions closely
but before that it may be noticed as to what are the
circumstances sought to be proved in the case, who


            
            are the witnesses proving cach of such circumstance
and how much of the circumstance has been legally
established. As I procced, I shall refer to the findings
made by the High Court Division in respect of these
matters.

22. As to the calling away of Khairul by
Khasru there is the evidence of PW 1, Abdur Sattar
Khalifa, PW 2 Selim, PW 3 Nurul Hog and PW 18
Rahman Nessa, mother of Khairul. PW 1 stated in
his evidence that at about 2-45 to 3-00 PM on
4.1.79 Khasru took out his son from his house. PW
2 Selim who was playing volleyball with Khairul
and others in the field near the house of Khasru
stated that at about 2-00/2-30 PM Khasru called out
Khairul to take plum, Khairul then went away with
him. PW 3 Nurul Hog stated that a about 2-30/3-00
PM he was tapping date trees at the house of the
respondents. He saw Khasru calling out Khairul
Alam to take plum. PW 18 Rahimannessa stated
that on 19 Poush 1385 BS at about Zahor prayer
time her son Khairul came and took his meal and
went out saying that he was going to the bus stand
with Khasru.

23. The Iearned Judges of the High Court
Division considering this part of the evidence (except
PW 3) observed that the three stories of taking away
of the deceased by Khasru were so discrepant that it
was difficult to place any reliance on the evidence of
‘the three witnesses (PWs 1, 2, 18). I find it difficult
to appreciate the basis of alleged discrepancy in the
aforesaid evidence, rather I agree with the submission
of the learned Additional Attorney-General that the
evidence has been discarded illegally, for, I do not
think that there is any material discrepancy in this
part of the evidence, inasmuch as the witnesses were
giving their own account of calling away Khairul by
Khasru as they had seen in their own surroundings,
Indeed it will be scen in retrospect that there was
nothing wrong or suspicious about calling of
Khairul by Khasru for taking plum. The parents of
‘Khairul did not utter a word in their evidence against
the respondents expressing any doubt or suspicion at
the calling away of their son by Khasru. There is
nothing in their evidence (or in the evidence of PWs
2 and 3) for which their testimony can be disregarded
on the point of calling away of Khairul by Khasru
which apparently was an innocent act. I, therefore,
hold that the fact of calling away of Khairul by
Khasru has been satisfactorily established. The
learned Additional Attorney-General jg right in his
contention that this part of the evidence has been
wrongly discarded. So, this is a circumstance against
Khasru only. 

24. It is in evidence that the bus Stand in the
Noapara village is about 200/300 cubits away from
the house of PW 1. It takes an hour to go to
Takerhat from Noapara by bus. PW 8 Baten Kazi on
his way to the bus stand at about 2-00/2-39 PM saw
Khairul and Khasru going towards the same
direction. PW 4 Munsur Molla, PW 5 Abdul Karin,
Munshi, PW 6 Abdul Jalil, PW 7 Jinnat Ali saw
both the respondents, PW 9 Mintu Mirza and
Khairul Alam to get on board a bus going to
Takerhat (and coming from Faridpur) at the Noapara
bus stand at about 3-30/4-00 PM. Pw 9 Mintu
Mirza stated that he travelled in the same bus from
Noapara bus stand and all of them got down at
Takerhat. On his query the respondents said that they
had come there to hear songs. PW 9 Mintu Stated in
cross-examination that he reached Takerhat at about
4-00/4-30 PM.

25. This group of witnesses stated in their
evidence that they had informed PW 1 Sattar on
5.1.79 about their seeing of the respondents and
Khairul together as stated above when PW 1 was
looking for his missing son. In his FIR filed on the
following day i.c. 6.1.79 PW 1, however, did not
mention about the aforesaid information given to
him by the said witnesses. The High Court Division
because of such omission made by PW 1 in the
FIR, which was observed to be "much delayed",
took note of the defence argument that the said
witnesses were subsequently procured and tutored by
the prosecution. Although the witnesses were not
expressly disbelieved but from the tenor of the
discussion, it appears that the learned Judges seemed
to favour the defence argument. There should have
been no difficulty in rejecting the defence contention
because the learned Judges themselves noticed that
the learned advocate for the appellants had conceeded
that the FIR could not be used to contradict one
witnesses, There’ was no delay either in lodging ne
FIR because it is in evidence that PW 1 a! ng
earliest opportunity filed the same after reach!
Takerhat at about 10-00/11-00 AM on 6.1.79. , ad
got the information about the recovery of the his
body .of Khairul Alam-at Takerhat from his
emissaries at about 8-30/9-00 PM of the previous


            
            night. There was no bus available then for a journey
to Takerhat so he started for Takerhat at about
9-00/10-00 AM on the following morning. He filed
a written FIR at the Sindhiaghat police outpost
where the dead body of Khairul was lying. It cannot
be said therefore that there was any delay in
loading the FIR. PWs 4-7 and 9 had no particular
reason to depose falsely against the respondents.
their evidence appear to be natural and truthful, All
the aforesaid witnesses, in my opinion, have
satisfactorily proved that the deceased Khairul Alam
travelled with the respondents from Noapara to
takerhat by bus in the afternoon of 4.1.79 and all of
them got down at Tekerhat at about 4-00/4-30 PM.
this is the second circumstance which may be
considered against both the respondents. Mr. Abdul
Malek does not scriously object to the acceptance of
ine evidence so far.

26. From this point onward up to the time of
the recovery of the dead body of Khairul in the
mustard-ficld at Char Parsannadi Mouza at about
3.00/3-30 PM on the following day i.e. 5.1.79 the
respondents were alleged to have been found along
with the deceased (third circumstance) by two other
witnesses, namely, PW 11 Shahjahan Bepari and
PW 12 Sckandar Ali. These two witnesses claimed
to have scen all the three boys on the bank of the
tiver Kumar in Char Prasannadi Mouza some time
after they had alighted from the bus at Tekerhat.
From the description.of the topography given by
PW 11 it appears that the forlorn place on the bank
of the river Kumar where the two witnesses had seen
the aforesaid boys will be about half a mile from
Tekerhat. These two witnesses are naturally very
crucial. The High Court Division upon considering
their evidence very closely, found that no reliance
could be put on their evidence that they had seen the
respondents with the deceased in the evening or night
of 4.1.79 near the bank of the Kumar river. The first
ground for rejecting their evidence was the apparent
contradiction between their evidence and the
statement made by them before the police. In their
evidence  they said that they had seen 3 boys, two
older ones ‘and one younger but before the police
they said that they had seen only two boys in all.
pw 11 Shahjahan Bepari stated that he saw the
boys at about 4-00 or 4-30 PM but before the
investigating Officer he stated that he had seen the
bous at 6-00 PM. PW 12 Sekandar Ali stated in his
evidence that he had seen the boys at about sunset
time but to the Investigating officer, PW 22 he
Stated that he had seen the boys at 7-00 PM. It
cannot be denicd that these are clear and blatant
contradictions. It is apparent that the two witnesscs
forwarded the time of their alleged sceing of the
respondents and the deceased at the trial, evidently,
after wisdom had dawned on the prosccution that at
6-00 or 7-00 PM in the month of January darkness
sets in fully and it becomes physically difficult to
see objects or persons at a distance and recognition
also becomes difficult. The learned Judges
disbelicved the two witnesses further on the ground
that their identification of the respondents in the TI
Parade held on 6.6.79 had lost all significance in
view of the fact that they had chance to sce the
respondents before the said date. This view was
taken upon examining the order-sheet of the court of
the Sub-divisional Magistrate, Faridpur relating to
production of the accused and shifting of the date for
TI Parade. Identification in a TI Parade held long
after five months of momentary meeting of strangers
is likely to become a questionable exercise. PWs 11
and 12, it appears, stated in their evidence that they
had informed PW 13, Abul Kashem and others at the
time of recovery of the dead body of Khairul that
they had seen the victim boy and 2 other oldcr boys
on the previous day in the mustard field but PW13
does not support them. PW 12 is none other but
brother of PW 13. But PW 13 stated in cross-
examination that he had no talk with. PW 12
Sekandar Ali then. Considering the reasons given by
the learned Judges which cannot be brushed aside, it
is not open to us to say that the High Court
Division committed any mistake in finding that the
evidence of PWs 11 and 12 could not be accepted.
There has been no violation of any norm or
procedure in assessing the evidence of the said two
witnesses for which the finding of fact made by the
High Court Division is liable to be disturbed. I am
myself satisfied that it is not at least safe in the
circumstances noticed above and considered by the
High Court Division to rely upon the evidence of
the said two witnesses. The learned Additional
Attorney-General has not been able to show any
cogent reason for interference with this finding of
the High Court Division.

27. The position, therefore, comes to this that
the respondents and the victim boy are proved to
have been seen together at Tekerhat at about
4-00/4-30 PM on 4.1.79. The third circumstance

            
            (the boys together on the bank of river Kumar) has
not been satisfactorily established. There is no
evidence, no circumstance proved to show that the
respondents were present with the deceased boy when
he was murdered at a fairly distant place from
Tekerhat bus stand, in all probability in the night
following 4.1.79.

28. In this situation there arises for
considcration the ultimate question whether the
circumstances proved and found in the case were
incompatible with any other hypothesis than that of
the guilt of the respondents. The learned Judges of
the High Court Division rightly addressed
themselves to this question assuming that the two
circumstances as noticed above were proved and
established. Relying upon the decisions in IJ DLR
(SC) 365, Eradu and others Vs. The State of
Hyderabad, PLD 1956 (SC) India 286 and Ismail
Sarker and others Vs. The State 33 DLR 320 the
High Court Division found that the circumstances
proved, namely, that the deceased went away with
Khasru on being called by him, that Khairul was last
seen with the respondents in the afternoon of 4.1.79
at Tckerhat before his dead body was found on the
following midday in Char Prasannadi Mouza do not
inevitably point to the conclusion that the
respondents either murdered or abetted the
commission of murder of the deceased boy.

29. As already indicated in the beginning, the
facts of the present case are very much similar to
that of the JJ DLR Case. That the circumstances of
that case as in the present‘ can never be said to be
conclusive as to the guilt of the accused, Munir CJ
emphatically remarked that “no body of men, unless
their thinking faculty had been completely paralyzed,
could have returned a verdict of guilty of murder in
the present case". The circumstances in the Indian
Supreme Court case (PLD 1956 SC (Ind) 286) are
far more incriminating; there was evidence of ill-will
and some recoveries after the occurrence besides the
evidence of accosting the deceased and asking him to
accompany the accused on the evening of the day in
question; even then it was held that these
circumstances, by themselves, are not enough
without anything morc to connect the accused with
the crime and they are entitled to be acquitted. In an
old Lahore Case, Ghulam Rasul @ Pathan Ys,
Emperor, 107 IC 1928 P 774, there was evidence of
motive besides the usual evidence of calling away
and seeing together but even then the Division
Bench presided over by Sir Shadi Lal, Kt chief
Justice held that the two circumstances proved in
that case do not exclude every reasonable hypothesis
other than that the death of the victim was cased by
the prisoners.

30. The learned Additional Attorney-General
argucd that the respondents offered no explanation as
to what had happened after they were last Seen at
Tekerhat, that they were found absent in their house
in the night of 4.1.79 and on the following morning
and these are circumstances, which, if considered
along with the other already found, would complete
the chain and exclude the possibility of the
innocence of the respondents. On the point of
absence of explanation (or giving false explanation)
as a conclusive circumstance, the learned Additional
Attorncy-Gencral referred to the case of Deonandan
Mishra (1955) SCR 570 Vol. 2. I have gone
through the facts of that case and found that the facts
proved in that case are so overwhelmingly
incriminating that the fact of no explanation and in
other respect giving false explanation, as held in that
case," goes a long way against him" (accused), It
was held further "These false explanations are telling
circumstances which, in a case depending on
circumstantial evidence taken with the other facts
such as those in this case, are enough to bring the
guilt home to the accused". The other facts were that
the deceased Parbati Devi was the estranged wife of
the appcllant, a Stenographer in the Income Tax
Office, Patna, that there was a fairly strong motive
for murder, that the accused took charge of the
murdered woman on the evening prior to her death,
that he was found travelling by train from Patna to
Gaya with the woman and her dead body was found
in the outskirts of Gaya on the following morning,
that a knife said to be belonging to the accused was
found by the side of the deceased which was
blood-stained and that the accused himself bore
simple injuries on his person shortly after the
incident. Evidently, the distinction between that case
and the present is too great to pause for any scrious
consideration to the argument of the learned
Additional Attorney-General.

31. There is absolutely no material on record
to show that anybody, including the parents of the
victim boy, had at stage expressed any suspicion
that the respondents might have had any evil motive

            
            in calling out and accompanying the victim boy. All
that the father (Pw 1) said at the trial was that the
motive for murder was t0 give him pain and sorrow
for the rest of his life. This is no motive. He did not
say why the two young respondents would like to
cause him pain and sorrow. Rather it is significant
that candidly said in cross-examination that as
he did not suspect that Khasru would kill Khairul, he
did not make any GD entry. The mother (PW 18)
said that she did not obstruct her son from going
with Khasru. There is no material to suggest even
that there might have been some immediate and
on-the-spot reason for the respondents to cause
violence to the victim boy or that they were acting
at some others’ behest. Therefore, it seems clear that
upon the facts proved and on authority, the two
circumstances referred to above are just not and
cannot be conclusive evidence as to the guilt of the
respondents. The High Court Division has correctly
applied the rule as to circumstantial evidence in the
facts of the present case.

32. In view of the discussion above, I find no
substance in the contention raised on behalf of the
State except that the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 3 and 18
was wrongly discarded. But the said evidence by
self does not advance the prosecution case much.
There has been no failure of justice.

The appeal is thus dismissed.

_ Mustafa Kamal, J: I have gone through the
judgments proposed to be delivered by my learned
brothers ATM Afzal, J. and Latifur Rahman, J. I
Concur with the judgment and order proposed to be
(clivered by my learned brother Latifur Rahman; J. I
give my reasons as hereinunder.

35. There can be no two opinions on the legal
position long established by sound judicial
precedents that when there is no direct evidence, the
solitary circumstance that the deceased was last seen
alive in the company of the accused, while raising a
strong Suspicion against him, cannot sustain his
conviction for murder.

36. In the case of Ghulam Rasul alias Pathan
Vs. Emperor, 107 IC 1928 774, the Lahore High
Court has been given one reason as to why this sort of
circumstancial evidence is not conclusive. It says,
they (the circumstances) are not incompatible with
the theory that the Prisoners had parted company
with Juman (the deceased) before he was assaulted
and that, as he (the deceased) was in the habit of
going out at night in order to commit theft in the
fields of other persons he was done to death while he
was attempting to commit theft". In other words,
the possibility is there that the gap between the time
when the deceased was last seen with the accused and
the commission of his murder may be filled up with
other probable happenings.

37. In all cases of this nature it is therefore
pertinent to enquire (a) the time lag between the last
viewing of the deceased in the company of the
accused and his murder (b) the distance between the
place of his last viewing and the place of assault and
murder (c) the age and habits of the deceased (and
also his companion-accused) to determine whether
the deceased had any opportunity, occasion or
motive to part company with the accused. The
proposition of law that the solitary circumstance
stated above is not conclusive cannot be applied
mechanically.

38. My Iearned brother ATM Afzal, J. has
accepted the prosecution story, as I do on exactly the
same reasons given by him, that "the fact of calling
away of Khairul by Khasru has been satisfactorily
established” and that the prosccution witnesscs have
"satisfactorily proved that the deceased Khairul Alam
travelled with the respondents from Noapara to
Tckcerhat by bus in the afternoon of 4.1.79 and all of
them got down at Tekerhat at about 4-00/4-30 PM."
At least PW 9 saw the deceased and the accused
together at Tekerhat at about 4-00/4-30 PM.

39. My Iearned brothers ATM Afzal J. and
Latifur Rahman, J. have subsequently differed as to
whether the next circumstance, namely, the seeing
of the deceased in the company of the two
accused-respondents by PWs 11 and 12 on the bank
of the river Kumar at Char Prasannadi mouza some
time after they had alighted from the bus at
Tekerhat, has been satisfactorily proved or not.
ATM Afzal, J. has not considered it safe in the
circumstances noticed by him and considered by the
High Court Division to rely upon the evidence of
PWs 11 and 12. Latifur Rahman, J. for reasons
given in his judgment, placed full reliance on the
evidence of those two witnesses.

40. My own view is that the prosecution case
can well rest on the two circumstances held to have
been satisfactorily proved by my Iearned brother
ATM Afzal, J. The prosecution story need not travel

            
            beyond Tekerhat and beyond 4-00/4-30 gf of
4.1.79,
41. My first reason for holding so is that
Khairul Alam's dead body was recovered not from a
far-away place, but from only about half a mile from
Tekerhat where the deceased was last seen with the
accused. As ATM Afzal, J. says, “From the
description of the topography given by PW 11 it
appears that the forlorn place on the bank of the river
Kumar where the two witnesses had scen the
aforesaid boys will be about half a mile from
Tekerhat", That is the same place from where
Khairul's dead body was recovered. Therefore it can
be safely concluded that the deceased did not travel far
from where he was last scen alive. There is no
evidence that he was killed elsewhere and his dead
body was planted in the mustard field only about half
a mile away from Tekerhat to throw suspicion on
the accused.

42. My second reason is that the deceased was
killed not many hours after 4-00/4-30 PM of 4.1.79.
PW 17 Dr. Zamiruddin Ahmed conducted post-
mortem cxamination on the dead body of Khairul on
6.1.79 at 1-30 PM. He stated in cross-examination
that the age of the injurics which killed him was
about 47 to 48 hours at the time of holding
post-mortem examination by him. That statement
puts the approximate time of murder to 1-30 PM of
4.1.79. In January darkness sets in fully at 6-00 or
7-00 PM. After alighting from the bus at 4-00/4-30
PM the deceased was taken only half a mile away
and he was done to death very soon after sunsct. This
conclusion is consistent with the medical evidence
on record. The margin of error in calculation of the
approximate time of murder is only 3-4 hours and
the error is in favour of the prosccution case. The
lime gap between the deceased's last being seen alive
and the commission of murder is so short that the
possibility of an intervening circumstance is almost
nil in this case,

43. The third reason is this. In the facts and
circumstances of this case there is absolutely no
possibility whatsoever that the accused had parted
company with the deceased before he was assaulted.
Deceased Khairul was a minor boy of about 9/10
years. Accused Khasru and Nawab are aged about 14 ,
and 16 years respectively. According to PW 4, it
takes about one hour by bus to go to Tekerhat from
Noapara, the village home of the deceased. Tekerhat
is therefore quite a distance away from Noapara. IT is
under a separate mouza and police station. there is
no evidence that Khairul ever visited Tekerhgt, before
or knew anyone at Tekerhat or had an relations
there. The defence suggestion that Khairul was a
naughty boy, that he used to mix with baq boys and
that he used to go out of his house taking money
had been stoutly denied by his father the informant
PW 1. The suggestion has remained in the realm of
suggestion and has not been made probable at all. a
minor boy of about 9/10 years has ventured out of
his house in the company of older boys, travelled
some distance away from his home by bus and
landed himself in an unknown place when the sun
was about 1o set. He is not a grown-up man, He
cannot part company with his known COMpanions
and pick up other acquaintances in an unknown place
when darkness sct in. His age and the Circumstance
of his arrival at Tekerhat militate against the
possibility of such happening. He cannot be on his
own. The two accused-respondents did not offer any
explanation what happened to Khairul after they
reached Tekerhat. They raised the plea of alibi in
support of which they did not adduce any evidence.
Therefore in this case, taken all the circumstances
together, the circumstantial evidence is incompatible
with the innocence of the accused and incapable of
explanation upon any other reasonable hypothesis
than that of the guilt of the accused.

44. In the case of Shamsuddin Sarkar Ys. The
State, 11 DLR (SC) 365, two accused boys came to
the house where the deceased, a school boy and a
relation, resided and stayed there for five days. On
the last day of their stay, they had taken the minor
boy out of the house. On the next day the dead body
of the deccased was found hanging from a peg ina
room in the school. As the body was in an advanced
stage of decomposition, the doctor was unable to
state the cause of death. The evidence of PWs 1,2&
3 mercly proved the going out of the deceased boy
with the two accused persons and his being seen
later in the company of the appellant near a mosque
In the circumstances the Supreme Court held that it
was reasonably possible that the deceased might
have been murdered by someone else without the
accused knowing ‘anything about it. It ought to bbe
noticed that the deceased boy was killed in his own
village. He had the freedom and opportunity to part
company with the accused in his own village and it
was quite possible that he might have picked up


            
            other acquitances in his own village after, being
last seen with the accused. In the case’ under
consideration this possibility is non-existent. I have
already given my reasons.

45. In the case of Eradu Vs. State of
Hyderabad PLD 1956 SC (India) 286, all the four
accused persons and the deceased were adults. On the
evening of the day of occurrence all the
accused persons took out the deceased from his house
asking him to accompany them to a certain place.
Next day the deceased was found hanging in the
backyard of his own house. Adults have full freedom
and opportunity to part company with their adult
companions at any time of the night and therefore
this case does not stand at par with the case under
consideration.

46. In the case of Ismail Sarkar Vs. The State,
33 DLR 320, the deceased was seen in the company
of the accused in the house of the accused at 10-00
PM followed by discovery of his dead body at noon
ext day. This is also a case concerning adults on
both sides. Deceased Mohar Ali was a shalishdar,
naturally used to night errands. The facts of this case
also are very much different from the case under
consideration.

47. Each case of circumstantial evidence must
be decided on the given facts and circumstances and
applying the said test I hold that the prosecution has
proved its case beyond reasonable doubt against 
accused respondent No. 1 Khasru, although on the
rasons stated by my learned brother Latifur
Rahman, J. I would give bencfit of doubt to
accused-respondent No. 2 Nawab. .

I concur with the order passed by my learned
rother Latifur Rahman, J.

Latifur Rahman J: I have had the advantage
of through the judgment of my learned brother
ATM Afza J Since, in this case the circumstances
adduced by the prosecution relating to the murder of
a minor boy of aged 9/10 years, compellingly lead to
the irresistible conclusion that the crime was
committed by, accused Khasru and none else, I write
out this dissenting Judgment giving my reasons
hereinbelow.

50. accused-respondents Khasru and Nawab
were convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge,
Fridpur under Sections 302/109 of the Penal Code
and sentenced to suffer imprisonment for life. On
appeal, the High Court Division acquitted both the
respondents from the charge. The State being
aggricved by the judgment of acquittal has preferred
this appeal before this Court.

The prosecution case is that, Khairul Alam, a
minor boy of aged about 9/10 ycars, a student of
Class III, son of informant PW 1 Abdus Sattar
Khalifa was taken from his home on 4.1.79 at about
3-00 PM by Khasru accused-respondent No. 1. The
victim did not return home in the evening, so the
informant started searching for his son and went to
the house of Khasru's father accused Syed Mofazzal
Hossain (since acquitted), but did not find him. The
informant came to know from Nurjahan, Fupu of
Khasru that she did not know the whereabouts of
Khasru nor could she say where they had gone. The
informant then asked Syed Mortuza, an uncle of
Khasru, about the whercabouts of his son Khairul
Alam and Khasru. He also could not throw any
light. Having failed to trace them out, the informant
sent his second son Nannu (since deceased) to the
house of his father-in-law at Madhabpur and in the
house of his other relations to trace out his son. No
information having been received the family spent
the night anxiously and in the morning again the
informant went to the house of the father of accused
Khasru to see if they had returned. He having found
no information sent his relations to different
directions and also gave publicity by beat of drum
about his missing son with the help of his
son-in-law Abul Khair. At about 4-00 PM on
5.1.79 the informant got information at Noapara bus
stand that a dead body of a young boy was found at
Tekerhat. He sent his relations to Tekerhat and came
to know subsequently at about 9-00 PM that the
dead body of Khairul Alam was found in a mustard
field by the side of the river at Char Prasannadi
towards northern bank at Tekerhat. On 6.1.79 at
about 9-00/10-00 AM the informant left for
Tekerhat by bus, went to Sindiaghat Police Out
post, saw the dead body of his son and lodged the
first information report implicating respondent No.
1 Khasru, his brother respondent No. 2 Nawab and
their father acquitted accused Syed Mofazzal Hussain.
In course of investigation, a Test Identification
Parade of the respondents were held at Gopalganj
Sub-Jail where PW 11 Shahajahan Bepari and PW
12 Sekandar Ali identified the respondents. The Test
Identification Parade was necessary as these two

            
            witnesses saw the deceased along with the accused at
about sunset hour on 4.1.79 on the northern bank of
the river Kumar from where the dead body was
recovered. The respondents were thus put on trial
along with their father under sections 302/109 of the
Penal Code. The father was, however, acquitted by
the trial Court.

The defence of the accused persons is one of
innocence and their case is that they were falsely
implicated in this case. Their further case, is that the
deceased was a naughty boy and that he might have
been murdered by other notorious boys. It was also
the defence case that the respondents were at Jessore
on the day of occurrence and as such they could not
have committed the offence.

51. In this case prosecution examined 21
witnesses and tendered two witnesses and defence did
not examine any witness. There is no cyc-witness of
the occurrence. The trial Court on consideration of
the circumstantial evidences on record convicted and
sentenced the respondents as mentioned above. On
appeal the learned Judges of the High Court Division
acquitted the respondents holding that deceased
Khairul Alam was last seen in the company of the
respondents but that by itself was not sufficient to
Prove that the accused persons had committed the
murder. In other words, the learned Judges of the
High Court Division took the view that the
circumstantial evidences are not conclusive in nature
to warrant a conviction under sections 302/34 of the
Penal Code.

52. I will discuss hereinbelow the material
evidences on record to see whether the circumstantial
evidences that had been adduced in the case by the
Prosecution are conclusive in nature,

53. PW 1 Abdus Sattar Khalifa is the father of
the victim boy Khairul Alam who lodged the First
Information Report in the case. He testified that the
house of the accused persons is close to his house
and at the time of occurrence his son was aged about
9/10 years and a student of Class III. On 4.1.79 at
about 3-00 PM accused Khasru took his son Khairul
Alam from his house. The boy was wearing a check
half pant, half shirt and a sponge sandal. The boy did
not return home in the evening. He searched for him
in the house of Khasru and came to know from
Nurjahan, Fufu of Khasru that neither Khasru nor
Nowab were in the house. He again went in the
morning to the house of Khasru and came to know
from Nurjahan that none of the accused returned
home, At about 4-00 PM on 5.1.79 he got
information about the recovery of a dead body on the
bank of the river Kumar at Tekerhat from some
persons who heard about the recovery from a bus
conductor, driver and passengers. Later on the dead
body of his son was recovered from a musterd field
by the side of the river Kumar at Char Prasandi. He
also stated that other witnesses saw the Victim going
along with Khasru at Noapara bus Stand. The first
Information Report was lodged on 6.1.79 after the
recovery of the dead body. In CrOSS-examination he
stated that he did not lodge any First Information
Report or GD entry on 5.11.79 as he did not Suspect
that Khasru would kill his son. In CROSS-examination,
he further stated that Khasru would be aged ‘about 16
years. He also denied the defence suggestion that
deceased Khairul Alam was a naughty boy and that
he used to go out by taking money from his house,
He also denied the defence suggestion that the
accused persons were at Jessore at the time of
occurrence.

54. PW 2 Mad. Salim, a student of Class VIII
of Bhanga High School testified that on the day of
occurrence when they were playing volleyball in the
field to the east of Khasru's house at about
2-00/2-30 PM, accused Khasru called out Khairul
Alam to take plum and Khairul Alam went along
with him.

55. PW 3 Nurul Huq who hails from the
same village Noapara testificd that his house is 200
cubits away from the house of Khasru and when he
was tapping date tree he saw accused Khasru calling
out Khairul to take plum and they went out. In
cross-examination he stated that from underneath the
tree he saw Khasru and the victim boy going on foot
towards the bus stand.

56. PW 4 Munsur Molla, a neighbour of both
the parties stated that when he was at Noapara bus
stand he saw accused Khasru, Nowab and on
boarding a bus which was going from Faridpur to
Tekerhat, He also stated in cross-examination that he
told PW 1 on the night of 5.1.79 that he saw
accused Khasru, Nowab and others boarding a bus on
4.1.79 at about 4-00 PM. Wea 4-00 PM


57. PW 5 Abdul Karim Munshi who boarded
the bus along with PW 4 Munsur Ali saw. Khasru
Nowab, deceased Khairul Alam and others getting in
the bus.
            58. PW 6 Abdul Jalil has a grocer's shop at
Noapara bus stand and on the day of occurrence he
saw the accused and the deceased boarding a
Takerhat-bound bus. He also testified that Nannu,
brother of the deceased came to him in the evening
of the day of occurrence and enquired about his
brother, to which he replied that he saw accused
Khasru, Noab and deceased going towards Bhanga by
bus.

59. PW 7 Jinnat Ali has a grocer's shop at
Noapara bus stand. He also testified that on the day
of occurrence at about 3-30 PM he saw Khairul and
the accused persons boarding a bus towards Bhanga.

60. PW 8 Baten Kazi, a student of Class VIII
of Bhanga Pilot High School and play-mate of
accused and deceased testified that on the day of
occurrence at about 2-30 PM he saw Khasru along
with Khairul going towards the bus stand.

61. PW 9 Mintu Mirza, a neighbour of the
informant and the accused persons stated that he
boarded a Tekerhat bound bus from Noapara bus
stand to go to Barisal and in the same bus accused
Khasru, Noab and Khairul also boarded. He also
testified that at Tekerhat Khasru, Noab and Khairul
got down. He had talked with the accused persons
and on his query they said that they were going to
hear songs.

62. PW 11 Shahajahan Bepari hails from Char
Prasannadi from where the dead body of deceased
Khairul Alam was recovered. He testified that on the
day of occurrence at about 4-00 or 4-30 PM he went
to see his land and going to the river side, he saw 3
Persons, 2 older ones and a younger one standing
near Bhesal (structure of Khora net). According to
him the younger one was aged about 9/10 years and
Was wearing check half shirt and half pant. As they
Were unknown to him, he enquired about their
whereabouts and they said that they had come from
Bhanga. He also identified the respondents as the
other boys who were found along with the deceased
at the sunset time on 4.1.79. He went home and on
the following day he saw the dead body of the
youngest boy in the the mustard field at Char
Prasandi. Seeing the dead body he disclosed that
the victim boy hails from Bhanga and he came there
with two Other boys whom he would be able to
recognize if shown again. This witness identified
Khasru in Test Identification Parade inside Gopalganj
Sub-Jail This witness was examined by the.
Investigation Officer 2/3 days after the occurrence. In
cross-examination he testified that he identified two
suspects of which one was mistaken, that is, in all
he identified one suspect. He denied the defence
suggestion that the suspects were shown to him on
18.5.79 in court hajat by the police.

63. PW 12 Sekandar Ali, another person who
hails from Char Prasannadi testified that about
sunset hour he went to see his onion field and saw
two boys and one tender aged boy by the side of the
river. He further deposed that the tender aged boy
was wearing check half shirt and sponze sandal and
on his query he learnt from them that they came
from Bhanga. On the following day he saw the dead
body of the tender aged boy and disclosed that he saw
the victim boy along with 2 other boys on the
previous day and that he would be able to identify
them if shown again. This witness identified the two
accused persons at Gopalganj Sub-Jail and identified
them on dock. In cross-examination he denied the
defence suggestion that on 18.5.79 in court hajat the
accused persons were shown to him and on that day
he went to Gopalganj along with Rowshan Daroga.
The defence, of course, did not challenge the
presence of these two witnesses at the place of
occurrence..

64. PW 13 Abul Kashem Mia is a man from
Char Prasanndi who saw the dead body of the tender
aged boy in the mustard field. He lodged a petition
Ext. 2 to the Police out-post. This witness is the
brother of PW 12 and he deposed that PW 12 was
present from where the dead body was recovered.
This witness also stated that PW 11 Shahajahan was
also present there.

65. PW 14 Kazi Wahad is a witness who
prepared inquest report Ext. A. PW 16 Ashraf Ali, a
Magistrate, 1st Class, Gopalganj held TI Parade on
6.6.79 of Khasru and Noab, sons of Mofazzal
Hossain. He deposed that the suspects were mixed
up with under trial prisoners. ‘He stated that
identifying witness Shahajahan Bepari identified
suspect Noab and witness Sekandar Ali identified
suspects Khasru and Noab. In cross-examination he
admitted that Shahajahan identified one suspect’
wrongly. He denied the defence suggestion that he
was served with any application dated 6.6.79 filed by
accused and signed by a Magistrate. According to the
magistrate, the Test Identification Parade was held
after observing all. formalities. PW 17 Dr.       
            Zamirnddin Aimed, Assistant Surgeon attached to
Faridpur Jail Hospital who held post-mortem
examimition on the dead body of Khairul Alam at
1-30 PM on 6,1,79 found seven penetrating injuries
'1/2” in diameter each on the front of the neck which
were muscle and bone deep and one of the injuries
perforated through and through the back side of ae
neck piercing the softest structures on the side of the
vertebra(back bone), According to the Medical
Officer death was due to shock and hemorrhage as a
result of the injuries, The Doctor further opined that
the injuries could be caused by dagger and ballam., In
Cross-examination he slated that the age of the
injures was about 47 to 48 hours at the time of
holding post-mortem examination by him,

66. PW 18 Rahiman Nessa, the mother of the
deceased testified that at about Zahor prayer time her
son Khairul came home, took his meal and after
taking his shirt and sponge sandal went to bus stand.
He disclosed to her that he was going to bus stand
with accused Khasru, In Cross-cxamination she stated
that she told her husband and gon Nannu (dead) that
accused Khasru had taken away her son Khairul. She
also stated in cross-examination that she did not
obstruct her son from going with Khasru as she did
Hol suspect anything wrong. She also denied the
defence suggestion that the deceased was a bad boy.

67. PW 19 Shahabuddin Ahmed is a man
from Char Prasannadi and he saw the dead body of a
tender aged boy in the mustard ficld. This witness
further stated that he found PW 12 Sckandar Ali and
others who said that two other boys were there on
the previous day and that Sckandar further disclosed
that he would be able to recognize the other two
boys if shown again,

68. PW 22 Sub-Inspector Atiar Rahman got
the written information, held inquest and sent the
dead body to Faridpur Morgue on 6.1.79. He also
siezed one Sponge sandal, one half-shirt and some
blood-stained carth and some mustard plant from the
place of occurrence, He partly investigated into the
case, In cross-examination he stated that pw
Shahajahan Bepari and pw 12 sekandar ali told him
to have seen in all two boys and not 3 boys. pw 23
sub-inspector rowshan islam took over charge of
the case from pw 22 and submitted charge sheet in
the case. He also denied the defence suggestion that
he showed the accused persons on 6.6.79 and 18.5.79
to the identifying witnesses before RI Parade.

69. From the evidence aS discussed above the
circumstances which cmerge in the case are
catalogued hereinbelow for Proper appreciation of the.
case
(i) From the evidence Of the parents pw 1
Abdus Sattar and PW 18 Rahiman Nessa it is found
that deceased Khairul went oy, from his home in the.
company of accused Khasru.
(ii) It is in evidence of PW 3 Nurul Huq that
he saw the deceased and Khasry going on foot
towards the bus stand. The journey of the deceased
and accused Khasru towards the bus stand was also
seen by PW 8 Abdul Karim Munshi, g playmate of
the deceased and accused Khasru; 
(iii) PWs 4-7 saw the deceased boarding bus
which was going towards Tekerhat in the company
of accused Khasru and Noab Ali;

(iv) PW 9 who boarded a Tekerhat bound bus
from Noapara bus stand saw accused Khasru, Noab
and deceased Khairul Alam getting down at Tekerhat
from the bus;

(v) PWs 11 and 12 saw the deceased. along
with accused Khasru and Noab Ali last in the place
of occurrence at about sunset time on the day of
occurrence, The dead body was recovered on the next day from the bank of the rivar Kumar, Subsequently
these witnesses identified accused Khasru and Noab ;
Ali in the Test Identification Parade.

(vi) From the evidence of the father of deceased
Khairul Alam it appears that he went to the house of :
accused Khasru in the afternoon to enquire about his
son. He also went in the early morning of the next 
day to the house of Khasru and found accused Khasru
was Not present at home. Thus, from the evidence
on record, it appears that the accused was absent
from his home soon after the occurrence and
thercafter. This absconsion also is an additional
circumstance which is to be.considered in the prsent
case. This absconsion by. itself will not necessarily
lead to any conclusion about the guilt of the
accused, but this is only a relevant circumstance
along with other circumstances; |:

(vii) There is another vital circumstance that
is, a minor boy of aged about 9/10 years would not
normally leave the house, go by a bus to a place
which is 15/16 miles away from home unless he is
taken by his elderly associates and adult boys as in
the present case. The deceased being a minor boy.


            
            his going independently is doubtful and I consider
this minority of the boy to be another factor by
which the deceased might in all probability go from
his home being called by Khasru;

(viii)The defence case is not only one of
innocence, but the defence pleaded that accused
Khasru and Noab were at Jessore on the day of
occurence and as such it was not possible for them
to be in the company of the deceased and finally to
commit the crime. This plea of ‘alibi’ as taken by
the accused without leading any evidence that the
accused was at Jessore, shows that a false plea was
taken unnecessarily and this taking of false plea is
by itself another circumstance. The defence could
have simply denied their involvement in the case,
but taking of this false plea of alibi sounds
something fishy; .

(ix) The prosecution case with regard to the
time of occurrence, is that, the deceased might have
been murdered at the sunset time on 4.11.79. In this
case PW 17 Dr. Zamiruddin Ahmed who held
post-mortem examination on the dead body of
deceased Khairul on 6.1.1979 at 1-30 PM testified
that the age of the injuries was about 47 to 48 hours
at the time of holding post-mortem examination by
him. This mention of the age of injuries about 47 or
48 hours is also very material as the prosecution
evidence is that the death might have becn caused at
sunset time on 4.1.1979. This time gap as
mentioned by the medical officer, is also another
corroborative circumstance in the case as to the time
of occurrence, particularly when the deceased was
seen last in the company of accused Khasru at sunset
time,

(x) In this case, all the witnesses adduced by
the procution are independent and disinterested
witness As a matter of fact no enmity could be
suggested to any of the material witnesses. In the
facts of the present case it is hardly believable that
the witness who are independent witnesses will
depose in the case, Particularly PWs 11 and
12 who hail from a different village saw the accused
in the company of the deceased for the last time;

(xi) From the medical evidence on record it is
further found that the deceased died due to shock and
haemorrhage resulting from the injuries which were
ante moretem and homicidal in nature. Thus, the
medical evidence is also a corroborative circumstance
in the case that the boy was done to death.

70. I have referred to the circumstances
hereinabove, and from the circumstances it is very
difficult to hold that any other person or any other
intervening circumstance would be a relevant factor
for causing the death of deceased Khairul Alam.

71. Iwill refer hercinbclow, the reasons of the
learned Judges of the High Court Division in
disbelieving the prosecution case, morc particularly
with reference to the fact which prompted the Icarned
Judges to pass the order of acquittal. The learned
Judges of the High Court Division as a matter of
fact believed the story of the deceased going with
Khasru from his home on foot and by bus, but they
disbelieved the story of the prosecution of secing
last accused Khasru with the deccased as deposed by
PWs 11 and 12. The learned Judges of the High
Court Division observed as follows:

"Thus no reliance can be put on the
evidence of PW 11 Shahjahan and PW 12
Sekandar Ali that they could recognize the
appellants in the evening or night on 4.1.79
near the bank of Kumar river".

72. The basis of this observation of the
learned Judges, is that, they thought that on 18.5.79
the identifying witnesses got a chance to see accused
Khasru and Noab before the TI Parade which took
place on 6.6.79 at 2-15 PM in Gopalganj Sub-Jail.
This observation of the learned Judges are not borne
out from the record of the case and as such I find it
very difficult to discard the evidence of these two
identifying witnesses. From the order-sheet dated
7.5.79 and 8.5.79 it appears that the accused were in
custody and on these two days they were not
produced in court. From the order-sheet dated 8.5.79,
it appears that the TI Parade was fixed on 16.5.79.
From the order-sheet of 18.5.79 it appears that the
Investigating officer prayed for another date for
fixing the TI Parade as the witnesses were not
present on the that date, though the accused. were
produced from custody and bail petition was moved
for them and the same was rejected by the order dated
18.5.79, fixing TI Parade on 5.6.79. From the
order-sheet of 5.6.79, it appears that witnesses were
present in court and the accused persons were in
custody. Finally TI Parade was held on 6.6.79 at
2-15 PM inside the jail premises and the same was
duly conducted by the Magistrate. The learned Judges
of the High Court Division held that when on
18.5.79, accused Khasru and Noab were produced in

            
            open court PWs 11 and 12 had the opportunity to
see the accused persons. This observation is contrary
to record as the order-sheet of 18.5.79 shows that the
Investigation Officer prayed for time for holding TI
Parade on another date as the identifying witnesses
were not present on that date. Thus, it is surprising
to note that on mere surmises and conjectures the
learned Judges of the High Court Division most
illegally and arbitrarily left these two witnesses from
consideration by holding as follows :

"This TI Parade on 6.6.79 has lost all its
significance in view of the fact that accused
Khasru and accused Nowab were produced in
open court on 18.5.79 giving the witnesses a
chance to see them.”

The learned Additional Sessions Judge had considered
this aspect very carefully and further found that the
Magistrate PW 16 has not noted anything in his
report of TI Parade that the suspects were shown
earlier to TI Parade to these witnesses. It was argued
before the trial Court that the accused had filed a
petition in the Court of Sub-divisional Magistrate,
Gopalganj about the showing of the suspects to
these witness's earlier to the holding of TI Parade.
But the Iearned trial Judge has rightly rejected this
argument as because nothing was brought to the
notice of the Magistrate PW 16 Ashraf Ali who held
the TI Parade that any such application was filed on
6.6.79 regarding showing of the suspects to the
identifying witnesses on 18.5.79. The Magistrate
testified that he was not served with any application
dated 6.6.79 filed by accused and signed by
Magistrate. In the examination under section 342 of
the Code, accused Khasru stated that an application
was filed before the magistrate stating about earlier
showing the identifying witnesses. But no such
application was in fact filed in the case. Thus, I am
consuained to say that the learned Judges most
illegally and arbitrarily and on pure surmise and
conjecture held that the possibility of seeing the
Suspects by. the identifying witnesses on 18.5.79
cannot be ruled out is untenable in law and fact.

73. The other material fact on which the
Iearned Judges disbelieved these two witnesses PWs
11 and 12, is the point of time of seeing the accused
persons in the company of the deceased for the last
time on 4.1.79. PW 11 testified that at about
4-00/4-30 PM he saw the suspects in the company
of the deceased. PW 12 another identifying witness
deposed that at about sunset hour he saw the
deceased in the company of the accused Person. the
learned Judges of the High Court Division though
observed that the villagers generally do not keep
watch and they take time simply by guess wrongly
observed that

“This change of time from 7-00 PM or
6-00 PM to 4-30 PM or before sunset appears
to have been purposely made by way of
embellishment in order to make it possible and
believable for them to have recognized the
appellants."

I fail to understand the logic of this Observation.
because PW 11 stated the time at about 4-00/4.39
PM and PW 12 stated at about sunset time, This is
all about the time that I find in their depositions,
Thus, the learned Judges unnecessarily tried to bring
contradiction about the time between 6-00 PM or
4-30 PM which is hardly of any importance in the
case as the evidence is that it was about sunset time
that the deceased was seen last in the company of the
deceased, I may point out that in the month of
January, sun really sects at about 4-30 PM. or near
about the time. It is a common knowledge that
villagers speak of time by guess and to determine
time accurately and definitely on that basis is not a
reliable test. I cannot overlook the fact that the idea
of time with village people is very vague and they
are not expected to give time with mathematical
accuracy. The material question for us will be to
decide whether, PWs 11 and 12 saw the accused
persons making last journey with the deceased at the
relevant time or at about the time. It is on record
that the witnesses saw the deceased in the company
of the accused at the sunset hour. It is also on record
that these two identifying witnesses soon after the
recovery of the dead body also disclosed to some 0
the witnesses that they would be able to recognize
the boys if shown again. Thus, I must say that the
learned Judges of the High Court Division on pure
surmise and conjecture disbelieved these two
material witnesses who came from a distance of
14/15 miles away from village Noapara and have got
no relationship with any of the parties nor these
enmity against the accused persons. Thus, on these
above two considerations, the learned Judges of the
High Court Division were in error and they wrongly
passed the acquittal order in the case. 

74. Mr. Abdul Malek, learned Advocate


            
            appearing for the respondents, primarily argued on
twO points. His first argument was that, in the
resent case there is no motive for the murder and as
such the prosecution case must be disbelicved.

75. It may be mentioned that in the present
case prosecution had not alleged any motive for the
murder. As a matter of fact, the parents namely PWs
1 and 18 have not suspected accused Khasru. Thus
no motive has been alleged by the prosecution.
Herein I may point out, that when prosecution
alleges motive, prosecution must give some
evidence of the same. In the present case, since the
minor boy was done to death by his school and
play-mates who are little elderly in age, it is really
difficult for the inmates of the house of the deccased
to speak about any such motive. As a matter of fact
itis really difficult to speak about the motive which
prompted the accused boys to commit the crime. In
the mind of a criminal there may be thousand and
one reasons for commission of a crime. But in the
absence of alleging any motive, can the prosecution
case be disbelieved ? Had it been a case of speaking
of a motive and the prosecution failed to prove the
same; I could infer that the prosecution case might be
false. But in a case of this nature, what transpired in
the mind of young boys remain unknown and for that
fact alone I cannot disbelieve the relevant
circumstances on record. Herein, I am not unmindful
of the broad fact that in a case of circumstantial
evidences, motive is an important clement and
motive should be considered in the context of the
evidence in a case. But it is equally true that the
discovery of the true motive for a crime is not
Imperative in every case. Thus, in the facts of the
Present case when no motive had been alleged by the
Prosecution, I do not give much importance to the
argument of the learned Advocate for the respondents.
I also do not think that failure of mentioning about a
Motive is material in this case, particularly when a
Minor boy of a school was done to death by another
elderly school boy. Today, crimes are committed for
Very insignificant ‘thing which it is difficult to
comprehend in a rational mind. :

76. Mr. Malek's next argument was that, even
if the deceased was taken by the accused persons upto
char Prasandi, deceased Khairul Alam might have
been Killed by unknown persons. I may point out,
that is assessing the evidence imaginary possibilitics
have no Place. What is to be considered are ordinary
human probabilities. Judging from that view, an
inference can be safely and firmly drawn against
respondent Khasru. Mr. Malck's argument is the
basis of a guess or hypothesis which is very remote
in this case. In all human and natural probability the
circumstances taken as a whole, lead to the only
conclusion that accused Khasru alone had committed
the murder. Mr. Malek's argument that the theory of
‘last scen together’, as has been found in this case
cannot Iead to the irresistible conclusion that the
accused persons are the authors of the crime, cannot
be accepted in the facts of the present case.

77. In considering all the above
circumstances, I must consider the chain of
circumstances together. Had it been a case that
Khasru was scen last in the company of the deceased
at the place of occurrence without there being any
evidence that they went together from the house and
travelled a distance of 14/15 miles by bus and finally
up to Char Prasandi, then the complexion of the
case would have been different. If I consider
individual circumstance such as going from the
house, travelling by bus, being seen at the place of
occurrence in isolation and divorced from the context
of the case, that may not appear to be very
important. But when these various circumstances are
considered conjointly, it Icads to no other conclusion
than this that the crime was committed by Khasru
alone.

78. With regard to the case of accused Noab
Ali, there is no evidence that Noab Ali called the
deceased from his house and PW 11 in his TI Parade
could not identify accused Noab Ali though the other
witness PW 12 identified Khasru and Noab both in
the Test Identification Parade. Since one of the
identifying witnesses could not identify accused
Noab Ali, I am inclined to give benefit of doubt to
this accused. Further, the Investigating Officer
deposed that both the identifying witnesses stated to
have seen two boys and not three boys at the place
of occurrence. Thus, Nawab is given the benefit of
doubt.

79. Onconsideration of the circumstances as a
wholc, I have come to the conclusion, that the High
Court's acquittal order so far it relates to
accuscd-respondent Khasru is based on unsubstantial
and irrelevant considerations which will be apparent
from.the discussions made above. Consequently, the
acquittal order of accused Khasru is set aside and the


            
            judgment of the trial Court is restored in respect of
this respondent alone. Accordingly, the appeal is
allowed in part.

Before parting with the case, it may be
mentioned that the learned Judges of the High Court
Division took note of some decisions regarding
circumstantial evidences. I have no dispute with the
legal propositions set out in those decisions. But the
pertinent question is, whether in the facts of the
present case, the principle as enunciated in those
cases have got any application. I clearly hold that
those cases are distinguishable from the facts of the
present case and the learned Judges of the High Court
Division wrongly relied on those decisions in
acquitting accused Khasru.

Order of the Court.
By majority decision the appeal is dismissed.

Ed.

SUPREME COURT
(Appellate Division)
(Criminal)

MH RahmanJ ATM       | Al-haj Md. Serajuddowlah
Afzal J. and Mustafa | ....... Accused-Appeallant
: Kamal J. 	         |
Judgment 		   | Vs.
January 16, 1991.    | The State...... Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 561A

Quashing of proceeding—Court will be loath to
stifle a prosecution at the initial Stage unless facts
are such as would attract inference that even upon
admitted facts no case can be made out and
continuation of the proceeding would be an abuse of
the process of the Court. (8)

Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 467

Making a false document—The maker must
dishonestly execute the document with the intention
of causing it to be believed that such document was
executed by or by the authority of a person by whom
or by whose authority he knows that it was. not
executed..........................(9)

*Criminal Appeal No. 19 of 1989.

(From the Judgment and Order dated 21 May,
1989 passed by the High Court Division, Dhaka
Bench, in Criminal Revision No. 149 of 1989):

Moksudur Rahman, Senior Advocate (Mr
Sultan Ahmed, Advocate Supreme Cour, With him)’
instructed by Md. Aftab Hossain, Advocate...on
Record — For the Appellant. 

Shahabuddin Ahmad, Deputy Atlorney-General
instructed by Mohammad Ayub, Advocate-on-record
— For the Respondent.

Judgment

ATM Afzal J: The appellant is an accused in
a proceeding under sections 406/420/467/468/471/199
of the Penal Code now pending in the Court of the
Chicf Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka, The
proceeding has ariscn out of Sutrapur PS Case No,
34(8)/87 in which chargeshcet dated 13.12.87 under,
the aforesaid sections has already been submitted and
cognizance taken on 24.12.87. The appellant has
surrendered pursuant to the Warrant of arrest issued
against him and been granted bail by the Sessions
Judge, Dhaka.

2. He filed an application under section 561A
of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the High
Court Division, Dhaka for quashing of the aforesaid
proceeding. A Division Bench, by the impugned
judgment and order dated 21 May 1989, summarily
rejected the said application whereupon the appellant
came to this Division and obtained leave to appeal
from the said judgment and order. Leave was granted
to consider whether the High Court Division was
justified in the facts and circumstances of the case in
rejecting the application for quashing of the
proceeding.

3. The FIR in the case was filed by one Md.
Ataur Rahman, Inspector, DAB, Dhaka on 27.8.87.
He himself investigated the case and submitted
chargesheet as already stated above against the
appellant and one Md. Abdul Khaleque Bain upon
which cognizance was taken.

4. From the facts as disclosed in the FIR and
the chargesheet it appears that the prosecution case
briefly, is that the holding at 68, Mottijheel
Commercial Area comprising of an one-storied
building and 71/, kathas of land, briefly, the disputed
‘property, became abandoned since 1.1.72 » Bain
owner thereof, the aforesaid Abdul Khalequé after
(co-accused), had left for Pakistan immediately dul
the independence of Bangladesh. The said abdul
Khaleque Bain obtained settlement of the disputed

a

            
            property from the Government in 1958, the Iease
deed was registered in 1959 and he constructed a
building on the land and Ieft it out to tenants. The
Ministry of Works has been managing the disputed
property eversince it became abandoned under the
law The Government decided to sell the disputed
property along with other abandoned properties and
accordingly called for tender on 2.1.85 through
Newspapers. ‘One Syed Altaf Hossain became the
highest bidder for the disputed property offering Tk.
34,00,000.00. He made a down payment of Tk.
11,80,000/-being 15% of the bid money in favour of
the Executive Engineer (Maintenance) PWD, but the
Ministry of Public Works could not deliver
possession of the disputed property to the said Syed
Altaf Hossain as the appellant held possession
thereof on the basis of three sale deeds dated 10.8.85,
14,8.85 and 17.8.85 which were executed by the
aforesaid Abdul Khaleque Bain and registered at the
Sutrapur Sub-Registry Office.

5. It has been alleged that one of the original
tenants in the disputed property was one Mrs.
Jahanara Begum who was the Proprietor of
Khohinoor Corporation. The appellant who is a full
brother of the said Mrs. Jahanara Begum himself
used to conduct the business there. Mrs. Jahanara
Begum offered Tk. 15,00,000.00 for the disputed
property but her tender was not accepted.
Subsequently, however, she offered to pay the
highest bid money of Tk. 84,00,000.00 but the
Ministry rejected her prayer. It has been alleged that
the appellant having found no other way and in order
to grab the disputed property illegally managed to
bring the original owner Abdul Khaleque Bain, who
is a Pakistani citizen, and got the aforesaid three sale
deeds executed by him for a consideration of Tk.
3,00,000.00 although the disputed property was sold
at Tk. 84,00,000.00 to the highest bidder. The
disputed property, it has been asserted, is an
abandoned property and nobody has any right to
make a transfer of the same without the permission
of the Government. The sale deeds in question it is
alleged are forged and fabricated documents, executed
illegaly and collusively for the purpose of making
illegal gain of the valuable Government property at a
Price of Tk. 3,00,000.00 only. .

6. The appellant in his application before the
High Court Division claimed that Abdul Khaleque
Bain is a national and permanent citizen of
Bangladesh and he never left the country nor became
a citizen of another country to attract the Provisions
of the Bangladesh Abandoned Property (Control,
Management and Disposal) Order 1972, PO 16 of
1972. In the year 1983 the Government of
Bangladesh tried to disposses Abdul Khaleque Bain
from the disputed property treating the same as
abandoned Property whereupon Abdul Khaleque Bain
filed Title Suit No. 698 of 1985 in the 3rd Court of
the Subordinate Judge, Dhaka on 1.8.85 against the
Government of Bangladesh praying for a declaration
that he is the 16 annas owner of the disputed
property. In the said suit an Order of temporary
injunction was obtained by the plaintiff on 25.9.85
which was subsequently confirmed by order dated
9.4.88. The appellant has asserted that he lawfully
purchased the disputed property from the lawful
owner Abdul Khaleque Bain for a valuable
consideration during the pendency of the suit and on
his application he was added as a co-plaintiff in the
said suit. The aforesaid highest bidder of the disputed
property Syed Altaf Hossain was added, on his prayer,
as a defendant in the said suit by the trial Court but
ultimately this Division set aside the said order on
25.8.86 in Civil Appeal No. 21 of 1986. That suit is
still pending.

7. Mr. Moksudur Rahman, learned advocate
for the accused-appellant, has submitted that the
facts as narrated in the FIR and the chargesheet do
not disclose the offences alleged or any other offence
under the Penal Code or under any other law and as
such the learned Judges of the High Court Division
acted illegally in not quashing the proceeding as
prayed for. The learned Deputy Attorney-General
appearing for the State has, however, tried to
support the impugned order.

8. It is well-settled that the High Court
Division will be loath to stifle a prosecution at the
initial stage of the proceeding unless the facts of the
case are apparently and clearly such as would attract
an invariable inference that even upon the admitted
facts no case as alleged or as may be alleged under
any penal law can be made out and that further ~
continuation of the proceeding would be an abuse of
the process of the Court. In the instant case it will
be seen that the main allegation against the accused
relates to the commission of alleged forgery in
respect of the three sale deeds. It is admitted in the
allegations that. Abdul Khaleque Bain was the
original owner of the disputed Property which
allegedly became abandoned since 1.1.72 and vested

            
            in the Government. Article 6 of PO 16 of 1972
provides that any transfer of an abandoned property
except in accordance with the provision of the said
Order shall be null and void. Therefore, the transfer
of the abandoned property by Abdul Khaleque Bain
as alleged was void ab initio and thus there was no
question of making a false document.

9. Then again admitting that the disputed
property is an abandoned property and it vested in the
‘Government, the execution of the impugned sale
deeds by the former owner of the property or by any
other person in his own name and under his own
signature in favour of another does not attract the
offence of forgery, for, the gist of making a false
document lies in the fact that the maker of the false
document must dishonestly or fraudulently execute
the document with the intention of Causing it to be
believed that such document was executed by or by
the authority of a person by whom or by whose
authority he knows that it was not executed. The
underlying principle is simple. If a property belongs
to A and B purports to scll it by executing a deed in
his own name and under his own signature he does
not commit an offence of forgery. B will be guilty of
forgery if he executes the document in the name of A,

10. It may also be argued that, that the
disputed property is an abandoned Property has not
been decided by any court as yet and if the admitted
owner of such property executes a document in
respect of the same it cannot be said by any stretch
of imagination that he has committed an act of
forgery. The mere allegation that the property has
been grossly undervalued in the sale deeds in
question does not render the documents as forged
documents because the admitted owner of the
property has himself executed the said documents. It
is one thing to say that a document is collusive but
it is entirely different to contend that the document
has been forged within the meaning of section 463
and 464 of the Penal Code. In view of the admitted
Position that the executant of the impugned
documents was the Original owner of the disputed
Property who had executed the documents in his own
name it is clear that the allegation of forgery in the
circumstances of the case is clearly misconceived, The
other allegations as to criminal breach of trust and
cheating are equally unsustainable in law, There is no
allegation that the disputed property was entrusted to
the appellant or to Abdul Khaleque Bain and they or
any of them had dishonestly misappropriated the said
property. There is also no allegation that the accused
by deceiving any person fraudulently or dishonestly
induced that person so deceived to deliver any
property to any person, or to consent that any" person
shall retain any property, or intentionally induced the
person so deceived to do or omit to do anything
which he would not do or omit if he were not so
deceived. An yet another allegation that the accused
had used a forged document does not also lie, because
it has already been found that the allegation Of forgery
itself is not maintainable in the facts and
circumstances of the case. Thus it will be seen that
none of the sections mentioned in chargesheet can
have any application in the facts disclosed.

11. The High Court Division, in our OPinion
has made a wrong approach in the matter by holding
that "Admittedly, the property is an abandoned
property and has vested in the Government and if in
collusion with the former owner the petitioner has
created forged document, then there is a Prima facie
allegations." It ought to have been considered
whether in the admitted facts of the case and having
regard to the provision of law under PO 16 of 1972
as quoted above it could be said that the act of the
accused amounted to creation of a false document
within the meaning and definition of ‘forgery' under
the Penal Code. For the reasons stated above, we
have already found that in any case the alleged act of
the accused could not make them liable for making a
false document as would attract the allegation of
committing forgery.


12. If the disputed property is an abandoned
property as claimed by the Government the
impugned documents will be treated as void ab initio
and they cannot support any claim of title. It is for
the Government to take recourse to legal procedure
as may be available for recovery of possession from
an unauthorised occupant if it can be established bY
the Government that as a matter of fact the disputed
property is an abandoned Property. The prosecution
of the appellant, however, in the criminal Court for
the alleged offences must be held to be an abuse of
the process of the Court for the reasons indicated
above. We are of the view that the High Court
Division fell in grave error in rejecting the
application of the petitioner summarily. 
In the result, therefore, this appeal is allowed and
the impugned proceeding pending in Court of the
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka, is quashed

Ed.

            


            
           
           


 