
Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102(2)

Judgment
1. Md Abdul Matin J : This petition for leave to
appeal is directed against the Judgment and order
dated 15-12-2008 passed by the High Court
Division in Writ Petition No. 9865 of 2008 summar-
ily rejecting the writ petition.

2. The facts, in short, are that the petitioner
as writ petitioner filed an application under Article
102(2) of the Constitution, being Writ Petition
No.9865 of 2008 impleading the above named
respondents as respondents and impugning dis-
missal of election Appeal No. 68 of 2008 by the
Bangladesh Election Commission by order dated §-
12-2008 affirming the order dated 3-12-2008 passed
by the Returning Officer, Chandpur rejecting the
nomination paper of the petitioner in the 9th
Parliamentary  Elections, 2008 from the
Constituency of 260-Chandpur-1 stating, inter-alia,
that the petitioner was a permanent citizen of
Bangladesh by birth, He was a Presidium Member
of Bangladesh Awami League, He was State
Minister of Planning during the last Awami League
Government. During the said period, he was also
Minister in Charge for the Ministries of Civil
Aviation and Tourism and of Science and
Technology.

3. The petitioner submitted nomination
paper to contest in the oth Parliamentary Election,
2008 from Constituency No. 260, Chanpur-1, After
scrutiny, the respondent No. 3 rejected the nomina-
tion paper by his order dated 3-12-2008 on the
ground that he received a faxed list of persons con-
victed under the Emergency Power Rules, 2007
(EPR 2007), wherein he found the petitioner’s
name.

4. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with
the said order rejecting the nomination paper, the
petitioner preferred Election Appeal No. 68 of 2008
before the respondent No. 2 under Article 14(5) of
the Representation of the People Order, 1972 (PO
No. 155 of 1972), which was dismissed upon hear-
ing by order dated 8-12-2008.

5. The petitioner was convicted under
Sections 26(2) and 27(1) of the Anti-Corruption
Commission Act, 2004 (ACC Act 2004) and sen-
tenced to suffer simple imprisonment for 3 (three)
years and rigorous imprisonment for 10 (ten) years
and to pay a fine of Taka 10,00,000, in default, to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for a further period of
1 (one) year respectively by the Court of the Special
Judge, Court No, 3, Dhaka in Special Case No. 1 of
2007 arisin2 0:1 of F.)a0n YS Ca! 1¢ 3)200
by judgment and ord:r dated 2 3-7-1007.

6. Being aggrieved by such conviction and
sentence, the petitioner filed an appeal in the High
Court Division, being Criminal Appeal No. 4393 of
2007 on 4-11-2007, wherein by order dated 28-8-
2008, he was enlarged on bail and the sentence of
fine was stayed. Rule 11(2) EPR 2007 required for
the appeal to be heard within 90 days, but the appeal
had not been heard in over a year and was still Pe
ing.


7. Upon hearing the above writ petition the
High Court Division by its order dated 15 12-2198
summarily rejected it. The petitioner decided t,
move a civil petition for leave to appeal against the
said order to the Appellate Division and filed ap
application for obtaining a certified copy of the said
order, which was entered under Serial No. 2073
dated 15-12-2008.

8. In the meantime, the petitioner filed Civil
Miscellaneous Petition for Leave to Appeal No.
1012 against the High Court Division’s order dated
15-12-2008 which was moved before the Judge in
Chamber of the Appellate Division. Upon hearing
the said petition, the Judge in Chamber by order
dated 18-12-2008 stayed operation of the judgment
and order dated 15-12-2008 passed by the High
Court Division and directed the Returning Officer.
Chandpur and the Election Commission to accept
the nomination paper of the petitioner and allow him
to contest the ensuring 9th Parliamentary Election
scheduled to be held on 29-12-2008 in Constituency
No. 260, Chandpur | of District-Chandpur.

9. Accordingly, the petitioner’s nomination
Paper was accepted by the Returning Officer.
Chandpur and the Election Commission and the
petitioner contested the 9th Parliamentary Election
on 29-12-2008 from Constituency No. 260.
Chandpur 1 of District-Chandpur. The petitioner
obtained 1,07,461 votes, which was 56% of the total
votes cast in the constituency, and more than 26,000
votes than the candidate placed second. The peti-
tiner was duly declared elected by the Election
Commission as Member of Parliament from con-
stituency No. 260, Chandpur | of District-Chandpur
by gazette notification. The petitioner has since
taken oath as a Member of Parliament and is now
attending Parliamentary sessions regularly.

10. The petitioner moved an application
under Section 426(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in Criminal Appeal No. 4393 of 2007.

            
which was allowed by the High Court Division by
order dated 2-1-2009, and the judgment and order
of conviction and sentence dated 26-7-2007 passed
py the Iearned Special Judge, Special Court No. 3,
Dhaka in Special Case No. 1 of 2007 arising out of
police Station Case No, 19(3) 2007 was suspended,
such application was filed by the petitioner as a measure of abundant caution.

11. Being aggrieved by the judgment and
order of the High Court Division the petitioner has
filed this petition for leave to appeal.

12. Heard Mr Rokonuddin Mahmood, the
learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr
Mahmudul Islam, the learned Counsel appearing for
the respondent Nos. 2-3 and perused the petition and
the impugned judgment and order of the High Court
Division and other papers on record,

13. It appears that the High Court Division
relied on the case of AKM Mayeedul Islam vs
Bangladesh Election Commission reported in 48
DLR (AD) 208 in holding that the writ petition
directed against rejection of nomination paper and
dismissal of the appeal by the Election Commission
against such order is not maintainable. In that judg-
ment this Court held as under :-

“In the case of AFM Shah Alam vs Majibul
Hug, 41 DLR (AD) 68, this Court has in very clear
terms laid down that in local government elections
no step in the election process can be challenged
under Article 102 of the Constitution in the High
Court Division unless the impugned order passed by
the authority concerned is coram non judice or is
afflicted with malice in law. This decision of ours is
equally if not more forcefully applicable to parlia-
mentary and Presidential elections held under the
Constitution. The petitioner has neither alleged
coram non-judice nor malice in law in the writ peti-
tion, Apparently, the Returning Officer, acting with-
in his jurisdiction took the view that because of the

pendency of appeals against several orders of con-
viction and sentence respondent No. 3 will not be
disqualified from contesting the ensuing election,

because the orders of conviction have not attained
finality, It cannot be said that he had no authority to
so decide and it also cannot be said that his decision
suffers from malice in law. If an alternative inter-
pretation is possible with regard to the issue in ques-
tion, namely, the effect of pendency of appeals
against the orders of conviction and sentence, that
will be an election dispute for the Election Tribunal
to decide after the election if the petitioner or any
affected candidate elects to prefer an election peti-
tion to the Tribunal. The High Court Division ought
not to have pre-judged the issue under Article 102 of
the Constitution and ought not to have expressed
any opinion on the issue. It ought to have rejected
the writ petition in limine on the ground of main-
tainability, as no question of coram non judice or
malice in law was raised in the writ petition.”

14. It further appears that election process
Starts from the notification issued by the competent
authority declaring election schedule and culminates
in the declaration of result of election by a gazette
notification and thereafter the question in respect of
the effect of pendency of the appeal against the
orders of conviction and sentence becomes an elec-
tion dispute which can only be raised by way of an
election petition. The High Court Division has right-
ly refused to interfere with the electoral process.

15. In the case of AFM Shah Alam vs Mujibul
Hug reported in 41 DLR (AD) 68 it was held that in
election matters the jurisdiction of the High Court
Division cannot be invoked under Article 102 of the
Constitution except on a very limited ground of total
absence of jurisdiction (coram non-judice) or malice
in law for the purpose of interfering with any step in
the election process, like, in that case, acceptance of
nomination paper. It the present case it is against
rejection of nomination paper. No case of coram
non-judice or malice in law has been made out so as
to attract the jurisdiction of the High Court Division
under Article 102 of the Constitution.

16. Wherther the writ petition is maintain
 able against any step in the election process stands


            
well settled in view of the decisions reported in the
ease of APM Shah Alam vs Mujibul Huq reported in
41 DLR (AD) 68, in the case of Mahmudul Haque
(Ma) vs Md Hedayetullah reported in 48 DLR (AD)
128 and in the case of AKM Mayeedul Islam vs
Bangladesh Election Commission reported in 48
DLR (AD) 208. It is well settled that writ petition
under Article 102 is not maintainable against any
step in the process of election like acceptance or
rejection of nomination paper of a candidate.

17. In holding against the maintainability of
the writ petition in election disputes the real and
larger issue of completion of free and fair election
with promptitude and functioning of elective bodies
like parliament is of greater importance than settle-
ment of private disputes. Moreover, Article 125 of
our Constitution provides that no election to the
Offices of President or to the Parliament shall be
called in question except by an election petition pre-
sented to such authority and, in such manner as may
be provided for by or under law made by the
Parliament and, in such view of the matter there is a
complete ouster of jurisdiction in entertaining writ
petition in the matter of election disputes except in
cases of coram non judice or malice in law.

18. We find that the High Court Division has
correctly decided the issue of maintainability of the
writ petition which does not call for interference by
this Court. The order of stay by the Chamber Judge
and the subsequent steps in the election process
before getting the order or rejection of nomination
paper set aside in accordance with law, are of no
consequence.

The leave petition is accordingly dismissed.



APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Md Fazlul Karim J City Sugar Industries

Md Abdul Matin J Ltd. and others .

SAN Mominur Rahman J]... Petitioners

Md Muzammel Hossain J vs

Surendra Kumar Sinha J | Human Rights and
Judgniene rp = &
May 3rd, 2010 _| Sthers...... espondents

(In all the Cases)*
Environment Conservation Act (1 of 1995)
Section 7

Safety of the people be the Supreme
Law—public interest lies in protecting the ri

ers
from encroachments and pollution by all means.
The maxim ‘Salus Papuli Suprema lex’ should be
put in the imperative i.e. ‘Salus Papuli Suprema
lex esto’ let the safety of the people be the

SupremeLaw, nay (38)

Mahmudul Islam, Advocate instructed by Sved
Mahbubar Rahman, Advocate-on-Record — For the
Petitioners (In CP No.761 of 2010).

Mizanur Rahman, Advocate instructed by Md
Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner
(In CP No. 767 of 2010).

Mizanur Rahman, Advocate instructed by Md
Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioners
(In CP No. 768 of 2010).

Mehedi Hasan, Advocate (appeared with the Leave
of the Court) instructed by Md Zahirul Islam, Advocate-
on-Record — For the Petitioners (In CP No.769 of 2010)

Rafique-ul Hug, Senior Advocate instructed by Mvi
Md Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner
(In CP Nos. 772-73 of 2010).

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.761, 767-
769, 772-773 and 781 of 2010.

(From order dated 21-3-2010 passed by the t
Court Division in Writ Petition No. 3503 of 2009 in con-
nection with judgment and order dated 24th and 25th
June, 2009 and order dated 24-1-2010 passed in Writ
Petition No.2503 of 2009).

            
Rokonuddin Mahmud, Senior Advocate instructed by

mdra Biswas, Advocate-on-Record - For the
(in CP No, 781 of 2010)

pivash CI
Petitione

Manjil Murshed, Advocate instructed by Md Nurul
Choy the

ry, Advocate-on-Record ~ For
respondent No. 1 (In CP No. 761 of 2010)

Not Represented — For Respondent Nos. 2-20 (n CP
No. 761 of 2010).

Not Represented — For Respondents (In CP Nos.

247-169, 772-773 and 781 of 2010).

Judgment

Md Abdul Matin J : These petitions for leave
toappeal are directed against order dated 21-3-2010
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition
No. 3803 of 2009 in connection with judgment and
order dated 24th and 25th June, 2009 and order
dated 24-01-2010 passed in Writ Petition No.2503
of 2009 and having been heard together are being
disposed of under this judgment.

2. The respondent as the writ petitioner filed
petition No.3503 of 2009 stating inter-alia, that the
organsation “Human Rights and Peace for
Bangladesh (HRPB)’ is a non profitable registered
organsation and the objects of the organsation is to
uphold the rights of the citizen and to work for the
poor people to give legal support to the helpless
people and to build up awareness amongst the peo-
ple about their rights and activities against the envi-
ronment etc. Moreover, the organsation is also
working to protect environment and take legal steps
against the activities of destroying environment as
well in case of violation of law.

3. The writ petitioner No.1 is the secretary of
Human Rights and Peace for Bangladesh and other
petitioners are members of the executive committee
and all of them are practicing lawyers of this Court
and conscious citizen of the country.

4. The writ respondent No. | is Bangladesh
represented by the Secretary, Ministry of Planning,

Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, Dhaka, Writ respondent No. 2
is the Secretary, Ministry o!
Government of the People’s
Bangladesh, Bangladesh Secretariat, PS-Shahh:
Dhaka, Writ respondent No. 3 is the S
Ministry of Land, Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Secretariat, PS
~Shahbagh, Dhaka. Writ respondent No. 4 is the
Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Bangladesh
Secretariat, PS-Shahbagh, Dhaka. Writ respondent
No. 5 is the Secretary, Ministry of Local Govern-
ment and Rural Development, Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Bangladesh
Secretariat, PS Shahbagh, Dhaka. Writ respondent
No. 6 is the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping.
Bangladesh Secretariat, PS Shahbagh Dhaka. Writ
respondent No. 7 is the Secretary, Ministry of Water
Resources, Bangladesh Secretariat, PS Shahbagh,
Dhaka. Writ respondent No.8 is the Secretary,
Ministry of Communication. Writ respondent No.9
is the Chairman, BIWTA, 141-143 Motijheel C/A,
Dhaka. Writ respondent No. 10 is the Director
General, Land Records Survey Directorate, Tejgaon,
Dhaka. Writ respondent No.1! is the Director
General, Department of Environment, Paribesh
Bhaban, E-16, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar. Agargaon,
Dhaka. Writ respondent No. 12 is the Deputy
Commissioner, Dhaka, Office of the Deputy
Commissioner, Collectorate Building, Johnson
Road, Dhaka. Writ respondent No. 13 is the Deputy
Commissioner, Narayanganj. Writ respondent No.
14 is the Deputy Commissioner, Gazipur. Writ re:
pondent No, 15 is the Police Commissioner, Dhaka
Metropolitan Police, Dhaka.


5. The writ petitioners sought direction upon
the respondents to stop illegal encroachment, earth
filling and temporary and permanent structures
building on the River Buriganga, Turag at Dhaka
and on the River Shitalakkha at Narayanganj which
were built violating the provisions of the gla-
desh Environment Conservation Act. 1995 (amend-
ed in 2000 and 2002)

            
The writ petitioners also sought direction to
remove temporary and permanent structures built
inside the River Buriganga, Turag at Dhaka and
Shitalakkha at Narayanganj violating the provision
of law. The petitioners sought to bring this applica-
tion by invoking Article 102 of the Constitution as a
public interest litigation in order to take necessary
steps against the violation of provision of law as
well as for a direction upon the respondents to take
necessary steps.

Tt was stated that by illegal encroachment, earth
filing and temporary and permanent structures
building in the river Buriganga, Turag and
Shitalakkha at Dhaka and Narayanganj, violating
the provisions of law, the normal movement of the
water of the rivers was obstructed as well as seri-
ously affected the environment and it involves great
public importance.

It was stated that millions of people residing in
Dhaka and Narayanganj city are depending on the
source of water from Buriganga, Shitalakkha and
Turag river. Mmain water supply comes from the
above mentioned river. Not only that, some river
transports based on the above mentioned river are
playing a great role in the transport sector. Due to
continuous encroachment, earth filling and structure
buildings in the above mentioned rivers, day by day
it is losing its flow affecting the life of the citizen.
All the rivers are also playing an effective role in
protecting the environment. But due to illegal acts of
the law violators the above mentioned rivers could
into play effective role in environment.

The temporary and permanent structures built
in the River Buriganga and Turag around Dhaka city
and river Shitalakkha around Narayanganj city have
negative environmental impacts not only that, main
source of the water for WASA is the river Buriganga
and Shitalakkha. Due to high scale pollution of the
water of the rivers Buriganga and Shitalakkha,
Purification of water is seriously hampered.
Consequently quality of supplied water became

degraded. Hence thousands of people are becoming
sick and due to increasing problem day by day, the
life of the city dwellers are in danger.

It was stated that according to section 5 of the

it is prohibited to change the nature of any land
that has been earmarked as a natural reservoir. As
per section 8 of the said law any person who acts in
contravention of the Act is liable to imprisonment
not excceding 5 years or a fine not exceeding Taka
50,000. Moreover under Section 7 of the
Environment Conservation Act,1995, the authority
has been empowered to direct any persons responsi-
ble for causing damage to the ecosystem for adopt-
ing corrective measures. Due to the encroachment,
earth filling and temporary and permanent structures
built on the river Buriganga,. Turag and Shitalakkha,
the rivers are changing the nature which is not only
illegal but punishable offence under the provision of
law.

It was stated that disregard to laws and legal
provisions encroachment, earth filling and tempo-
rary and permanent structures building is continuing
and failure to ensure proper implementation of law
caused enough damage to the environment and
adversely affecting life of the citizen of the city.
Under these circumstances the Writ respondents are
legally bound to protect the river Buriganga,
Shitalakkha and Turag, in accordance with law. It
was stated that on 17-5-2009 to 22-9-2009 different
Teports were published in different news papers such
as Daily Star, Daily Ittefaq, Daily Janakantha and
Bhorer Kagoj that at different places of river
Buriganga, Turag and Shitalakkha there are
encroachments, earth filling and temporary and per-
manent structures built by the interested quarters
though it is unauthorized. It was stated in the report
that though such kinds of activities are continuing
but concerned authority is silent and not performing
their duties properly. Consequently, most of the

            
rivers are going to lose their existence which is seri-
ously affecting the environment. It was stated that
the interest quarters occupied the river and created
obstruction to the normal movement of the rivers,
which is seriously affecting our ecological system,

On 24-5-2009 after hearing of the said writ peti-
tion a Division Bench of the High Court Division
wyas pleased go issue Rule and passed an interim
order in the following term—

“Let a Rule Nisi be issued calling upon the
respondents to show cause as to why a direction
should not be given to the respondent Nos. 9,
10, 11-14 to demarcate the original territories of
the River Buriganga, Turag, Balu and
Shitalakkha, through survey by a special team
and restoring the said river to their original con-
dition and why all the respondents should be
directed to protect river namely, Buriganga,
Turag, Balu and Shitalakkha from illegal
encroachments and earth fillings and/or such
other or further order or orders passed as to this
Court may seem fit and proper."

6. Let the respondents be directed to take
immediate appropriate steps to stop further illegal
earth filling encroachments by different means and
construction of temporary and permanent struc-
tures/buildings in the rivers, namely, Buriganga,
Turag, Balu and Shitalakkha, till disposal of the
Rule.”

7. On 3-6-2009 the writ petitioner filed a sup-
plementary affidavit stating the following aver-
ments. It was stated the on 24-5-2009 after hearing
the parties the Writ Bench was pleased to issue Rule
Nisi upon the respondents and directed the respon-
dents to take immediate appropriate steps to stop
further illegal earth fillings encroachments by dif-
ferent means and construction of temporary and per-
manent structures/buildings in the river namely
Buriganga, Turag, Balu and Shitalakkha.

8. It was stated that a series of reports were
published in daily newspapers in which it was stat-
ed that the most of the area of the rivers are already

occupied by some influential persons violating the
existing law but no one is coming forward to stop it

9. The said Rule was heard on 3rd, 4th, 8th,
22nd, 23rd and 24th June of 2009 by the High Court
Division which made the Rule absolute without any
order as to cost with directions upon the writ-
respondents by judgment and order dated 24th and
25th June of 2009. The High Court Di in further
passed an order that the said writ petition should be
treated as continuing mandamus and allowed the
writ petitioner or other party or any other respon-
dents to seek directions from the relevant Bench of
the High Court Division in respect of any ambigui-
ty raised regarding the directions given in the said
judgment and order.

10. The present petitioners were not parties in
the said Writ petition.

On 7-10-2009 the writ-petitioners filed an
application for direction upon the respondent Nos.
2,9, 11, 12 and 15 to take necessary steps to stop
earth filling/encroachment on the river Turag at
Koundia, Mirpur, Dhaka and take appropriate
steps against the persons who are liable for the
gal acts stating the following averments-

11. It was stated that on 24-5-2009 after hear-
ing the parties the High Court Division was pleased
to issue a Rule Nisi upon the respondents to show
cause as to why direction should not be given upon
the respondent No. 9, 10, 12-14 to demarcate the
original territories of rivers Buriganga, Turag Balu
and Shitalakkha, through survey by a special team
and restoring the same rivers to their original condi-
tion and why all the respondents should not be
directed to protect rivers namely Buriganga, Turag,
Balu and Shitalakkha, from illegal encroachments
and earth filings and/or pass such other or further
order or orders as to this Court may seem fit and
proper. The Bench was further pleased to pass an
order directing the respondents to take appropriate
steps to stop further illegal earth fillings, encroach-
ments by different means and construction of tem-
porary and permanent structures/building in the


            
rivers Buriganga, Turag, Balu and Shitalakkha till
disposal of the Rule.

12. A news item was published in Daily
Prothom Alo on 2-10-2009 stating that some land
grabbers are continuing earth filling and illegal
eneronchment on the river Turag at Kauindia,
Mirpur. A photo of the earth filling and encroach-
ment has been printed which clearly shows that the
respondents are neither taking any steps to stop ille-
gal acts nor acting as per the directions and obser-
vation made in the judgment passed by the High
Court Division. It is stated that if the earth filling
and encroachment continue in that case it would not
be possible to restore the river to its original posi-
tion. Moreover, as per the direction of the High
Court Division survey is conducted by the respon-
dents but the purpose of the survey will be frustrat-
ed if earth filling is not stopped immediately.

13. In the aforesaid premises it is necessary to
pass an order directing the respondents to take nec-
essary steps to stop earth filing/encroachment on the
river Turag at Koundia, Mirpur, Dhaka and to take
appropriate legal steps against the persons who are
liable for the illegal acts and for the ends of justice
such order should be passed, otherwise, the appli-
cant-petitioner will be seriously prejudiced.

14. On 24-1-2010 the High Court Division was
pleased to allow the said application and further
pleased to pass an order directing the respondents to
start removing all the structures/encroachments
within the territories of rivers Buriganga, Turag,
Balu and Shitalakkha within one month from the
dated of receipt of this order and the work must be
completed by 30-11-2010 as per direction of the
judgment.

15. Pursuant to the direction given in the order
dated 24-1-2010 in Writ Petition No. 3503 of 2009,
Respondent No. 21 issued two notices both dated 9-
2-2010 addressed to Mr Fazlur Rahman, Managing
Director of City Group of Industries Ltd. under
Section 5(1) and (2) of the Government and Local
Authority Lands and Buildings (Recovery of
Possession) Ordinance, 1970 in respect of four
Jetties adjacent to RS Dag No. 75 and 861 under
Uttar Rupshi Mouza and Gandarpur Mouza,
Upazilla-Rupganj, District-Narayanganj directing
the petitioners to remove the said structures by 20.

2-2010 and to handover the possession of the
Government Land. On receipt of the said notice on
14-2-2010 the petitioners filed Writ Petition No
1393 of 2010 on 16-2-2010 before the High Court
Division and on hearing the matter on 18-2-201(
and 22-2-2010, the High Court Division passed
order on 23-2-2010 rejecting the said petition
marily.

16. The petitioners filed an application for
addition of party in the Writ Petition No. 3503 of
2009 on 7-3-2010 before the High Court Division
and also filed an application for direction stat
inter-alia that the petitioners are private companies
limited by shares duly incorporated with the
Registrar of Joint Stock Companies and carrying on
business of refining Soyabean Oil, Sugar and salt
and manufacturing Poultry Feed, Flours etc. in its
three separate factory all situated at Uttar Rupshi,
Rupganj, Narayanganj, which is adjacent to the east
bank of Shitalakkha river. The petitioners compa-
nies are selling the same in local market mostly by
using the said river all over Bangladesh. The peti-
tioners companies imported raw materials from var-
ious countries for production of above products. The
petitioners companies are all sister concerns of City
Group. All companies have separate VAT registra-
tion number and TIN (Tax Payee Identification
Number). The petitioner No.4 is the Managing
Director of the Petitioners Nos. 1-3 companies.

17. It was stated that the petitioners companies
purchased the entire land from different persons
through different deeds of sale and thereby mutated
their names in reported to the said property and
established the said industries thereon. All the sale
Deeds have been lying with the petitioners and the
same can be produced before this Court if'so direct
ed in course of hearing.

18. It was stated that the petitioner No.1 alter

            
setting up its industry made an application to the
respondent No.3 on 26-5-2005 for construction of a
semi pucea jetty at the eastern side of the bank of
Shitalakkha river and also praying for granting
licence for use of the fore shore, Respondent No. 3
the Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority
vide its letter being No. *14/cage1/98 4/3948 dated 10-10-2005 granted licence in favour of the petitioner
No. | for a period of 1 year to construct a semi-
pesca jetty and gave permission for use of the fore-
shore and after obtaining licence the petitioner No.
j complied of all conditions and accordingly a
undertaking was given in favour of Respondent No.
3. It is stated that the said licence has been duly
renewed from time to time and lastly it was renewed
for the year 2008-2009 vide Nathi No.ATe/casa/
389/290e dated 27-1-2009 issued by the concerned
person of respondent No. 3 and the petitioner No. 1
deposited renewal fee of Taka 91,824 in favour of
respondent No.3 on 5-2-2009 vide a pay order
receipt No.511969.

19. It was stated that the petitioner No.2 after
setting up its industry made an application to the
respondent No.3 on 14-2-1997 for construction of
semi pucca jetty and setting up a pipe line of oil
upon foreshore at the eastern side of the bank of
Shitalakkha river also praying for granting licence
for use of the foreshore. The concerned authorised
person of respondent No. 3 vide its letter being No.
714/Ca4/¢v/o8e dated 5-3-1998 granted licence in
favour of the petitioner No. 2 for a period of | year
for erecting jetty and gave permission to use of the
foreshore and after obtaining licence the petitioner
No. 2 complied of all conditions and accordingly an
undertaking was given in favour of the particular
authority of respondent No. 3. It is stated the said
Jicence has been duly renewed from time to time and
Jastly it was renewed for the year 2008-2009 vide
Nathi No#¢/ceae/ev/ae8 dated 19-11-2008 issued
by the concemed person of respondent No. 3 and the
petitioner. No, 2 deposited renewal fee of Taka
96,975 in favour of respondent No.4 on 1-1-2009
vide pay order No. 2581745.

20. It was stated that the petitioner No.3 after
setting up its industry made an application to the
respondent No, 3 on 20-9-2007 for construction of a
RCC jetty upon foreshore at the castern side of the
bank of Shitalakkha river and also praying for grant-
ing licence for use of the foreshore. The concerned
authorised person of respondent No, 3 vide its letter
being No. a14/cam/o20/93@@ dated 31-12-2007%
granted licence in favour of the petitioner No. 3 for
a period of I(one) year for erection of RCC Jetty and
gave permission to use of the foreshore and afier
obtaining licence the petitioner No.3 complied with
all conditions and accordingly an under taking was
given in favour of respective authority of respondent
No. 3 it is stated, the said licence has been duly
renewed from time to time and lastly it was renewed
for the period from 1-1-2009 to 31-12-2009 vide
Nathi No. #14/Cas41/o20/32¢@ dated 16-3-2009 issued by the concerned person of respondent No.3 and the petitioner No.3 deposited the renewal fee of Taka 3,11,794 in favour of respondent No. 3 on 5-5-2009 vide a pay order No. 2582273.

21. It was stated that an application filed by
petitioner No.1, the respondent No.3, granted
licence for use of the foreshore/bank and allowed
the petitioners to construct Jetty on the land area at
Rupshi Mouza under the control of Nai ny
River Port for a period of I(one) year effective from
1-9-2009 to 31-4-2010 with the option to renew for
another year subject to payment of fee for renewal
of licence in advance. The said licence has been
granted vide Nathi No.A1@/cis4/85>/e>> dated 6-10-2009. The petitioner No.1 paid the entire licence fee of Taka 4,23,408 and the same has been received by the concerned authority vide money receipt
No.5336719 book No.5337 dated 8-.10-2009.

22. It was stated that the petitioners are valid
and lawful occupants of the four jetties and fore-
shore areas and the banks thereto of the
Narayanganj river port. The said foreshore and the
adjacent lands of the river Shitalakkha have been
owned by Narayanganj river port under the authori-
ty namely respondent No. 3 and such demarcation of

            
laid of Narayanganj River Port have been made as
per provision of the Ports Act, 1908 with the amend-
ment made thereto from time to time, lastly being on
19-10-2004 as applicable in the instant case, The
petitioners’ jetties have been situated in the eastern
side of the river Shitalakkha and under the said
Bangladesh Gazette published on 19-10-2004 in
respect of Ports Act, 1908.

23. It was stated that on 14-2-2010 the peti-
tioners received two notices both dated 9-2-2010
issued by Additional Deputy Commissioner
(Revenue), District-Narayanganj, addressed to Mr
Fazlur Rahman, Managing Director of City Group
of Industries Ltd. (no such named company is in
existence) under Sections 5(1) and (2) of the Gover-
nment and Local Authority Lands and Buildings
(Recovery of Possession) Ordinance, 1970 in
respect of four jetties adjacent to RS Dag Nos. 75
and 861 under Uttar Rupshi Mouza and Gandarbpur
Mouza, Upazilla-Rupganj, District-Narayanganj,
directing the petitioners to remove the structures by
20-2-2010 and to handover the possession of the
Government land. It is stated in the said notices that
the same have been issued as per the direction given
by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.
3503 of 2009 for eviction of all unauthorized struc-
tures situated within the river. It is stated that the
said notices have been issued on misdescription of
the companies names.

24. It was stated that on receipt of the said
notices on 14-2-2010 immediately on the same day
the petitioners submitted a representation by annex-
ing all the copies of the licences issued by respon-
dent No, 3. It is categorically stated that the said four
jetties, constructed by the petitioners, are authorized
and legal and, as such, they said notices under the
said provisions of law are not applicable in case of
the petitioners and, as such, liable to be rescinded.
The office of Deputy Commissioner, Narayanganj
District, received the said representation on 14-2-
2010.

25. It was stated that the land, foreshore and
bank in question in respect of which the said notice

have been issued are owned by Narayanganj River
Port and respondent Nos.3 is the proper and appro.
priate local authority and the Additional Deputy
Commissioner (Revenue) Narayanganj District has
no lawful authority to exercised the power and
authority on such jetties, foreshore and bank of the
Narayanganj River Port.

26. It was stated that there are other industries
manufacturing the same food items establishing
industries adjacent to the land of other rivers like
Meghna, Karnaphuli and those industries have also
established jetties with necessary permission of Port
Authority concerned and if only the petitioners jet.
ties be allowed to demolish in pursuance of the said
notices then the petitioner No. 4 and other share.
holders of petitioners No.1-3 shall be discriminated.

27. On 21-3-2010 the writ-petitioners filed a
reply to the said application for direction in course
of hearing. The High Court Division has taken up
hearing of six application filed by different applica-
tion in pursuance of paragraph 32 of the judgment
and order dated 24th and 25th June of 2009. On
hearing all applications for addition of party and
application for direction, the High Court Division
passed an order on 21-3-2010 and found that the
present applications filed by the applicants includ-
ing the present petitioners are maintainable but addi-
tion of party is not necessary and passed an order to
keep the said application of addition of party with
the record. The High Court Division rejected the
application for direction upon hearing on merit but
directed the respondents not to demolish any struc-
tures of the applicants including the petitioners for a
period of (one) month so that the applicants may
move this Division in the meantime, if so advised.

28. Pursuant to order dated 24-1-2010 passed
by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No,
3503 of 2009, respondent No. 21 issued notices of
removal of all structures irrespective of legal or ille-
gal including as many as twenty government struc-
tures, educational institutions and madrassas
jetties and dockyards set up by BIWTA its
also 54 licenced persons from BIWTA within the


            
Narayanganj River Port Area, including the petition-

29. Being aggrieved by the said judgment of
the High Court Division these applications have
peen filed for Leave to Appeal.

30. Heard the learned Counsels appearing for
the respective petitioners and the learned Advocate
appearing for the respondent No.1 in CP No.761 of
2010 and perused the petitioners and the impugned
judgment and Order of the High Court Division and
other papers on record.

31. Mr Rokonuddin Mahmud, the learned
Counsel appearing for the petitioners in Civil
petition for Leave to Appeal No.781 of 2010 sub-
mits that the original judgment ordered to demolish
only the illegal structure but the High Court
Division illegally included the lawful constructions
also for demolition and therefore acted illegally. He
further submits that the legal constructions made
obtaining the necessary permissions from the con-
cerned authorities are protected the High Court
Division acted without jurisdiction in giving a direc-
tion for their demolition.

32. Mr Rafique-ul-Hugq, the learned Counsel
appearing for the petitioners in Civil Petition for
Leave to Appeal No. 772 of 2010 submits that the
High Court Division wrongly construed the original
judgment of the High Court Division.

33. He further submits that the High Court
Division failed to consider the provisions of the Port
Rules, in particular Rule 2(17) defining jetty and
making distinction between government construc-
tion and private construction, when no such distinc-
tion was made in the original judgment and order.

34. Mr Mahmudul Islam, the learned Counsel
appearing for the petitioners in Civil Petition for
Leave to Appeal No.761 of 2010 submits that there
cannot be any mandamus against law and since
licence has been given in favour of the petitioners as
per law the judgment of the High Court Division by
way of a mandamus is without jurisdiction.

35. It appears that the High Court Division
while rejecting the petitioners’ applications consid-
ered the judgment and order dated 24th and 25th
June, 2009 passed in Writ Petition No.2503 of 2009
and correctly considered the facts and circumstances
of the cases for removal of all structures on the
rivers in question and therefore committed no ille-
gality in rejecting the applications.

36. From the notice annexure-‘F’ series to the
writ petition it appears that the authority found the
petitioners have constructed structures on the river
illegally which were ascertained in the survey of the
tivers as held as per direction of the High Court
Division given in Writ Petition No. 3505 of 2009
vide order dated 21-3-2010.

37. It is true that mandamus cannot be issued
against law but fact remains that Act XXXVI of
2000 has provided for non-obstante clause in section
12(2) providing that notwithstanding any provision
in any other law for the time being in force the pro-
visions of Act XXXVI of 2000 shall prevail and
since rivers are “joladhar” (S14) within the mean-
ing of the Ain, the law relating to Act XXXVI of
2000 must prevail over all other laws and the High
Court Division rightly issued the directions in order
to the same the rivers from encroachments and pol-
lution.

38. We also find that the public interest lies in
protecting the rivers from encroachments and pollu-
tion by all means, The maxim ‘Salus Papuli
Suprema lex’ should be put in the imperative i.e.
‘Salus Papuli Suprema lex esto’ let the safety of the
people be the Supreme Law.

We find no substance in these petitions which
are-accordingly dismissed.



            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Abul Hossain and others
«Appellants

Md Abdul Matin J
SAN Mominur Rahman J
ABM Khairul Haque J
Md Muzammel Hossain J vs

Surendra Kumar Sinha J

Amjad Hossain and ors..
Respondents*

Judgment
April 2oth, 2010

Evidence Act (1 of 1872)
Section 110

Section 110 of the Evidence Act provides for
a presumption of ownership in favour of the per-
son who is in possession of the property. A person
in possession of land however imperfect his title
may be, has a good title against whole world
except the true owner and until the true owner
comes in Court to assert a claim to the property.
Possession is evidence of title, and gives a good
title as against wrong doer,

The High Court Division, in the premises, fell in an
error in reversing the judgment of the learned Subordinate
Judge without adverting to the findings arrived at as
regards acquisition title and possession of the suit lands by
the appellants. On consideration of the fact and circum-
stances of the matter, we are of the view that the High
Court Division erred in law in disbelieving the appellants
title in the suit lands. sveeeel 19)

Evidence Act (1 of 1872)
Section 110

Ifa party waives proof of circumstances jus-
tifying the giving of secondary evidence, he can-
not raise the objection in appeal, but consent or
want of objection to the wrong manner in which
relevant evidence should be brought on record of
the suit disentitles parties from objecting to such
evidence in a Court of appeal. seve 17)

*Civil Appeal No.94 of 2003

(From the judgment and order dated 20-8-2008

passed by the High Court Division in First Appeal No.52
of 1989).

Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan, Senior Advocate, instructs
by ASM Khalequzzaman, Advocate-on-Record—fn)
Appellants.

Md Nawab Ali,
Respondent Nos. 1-2.

Advocate-on-Record—For th,

Not Represented—For the Respondent Nos. 3-6

Judgment
SK Sinha J : This appeal by leave at the
instance of the plaintiff has arisen from a judgment

and order of the High Court Division in First Appeal
No.52 of 1989.

2. The said appeal arose from the judgment
and decree dated 27th February, 1989 of the Sub-
ordinate Judge, Second Court, Dhaka in Title Suit
No.77 of 1986. Appellants instituted the above suit
seeking declaration of title in respect of 0.09 acres
of land and also for declaring a deed dated 10th
January, 1987 executed by the respondent No.2 in
favour of the respondent No.1 as void and no bind-
ing upon them.

3. Short facts of the plaintiffs’ case are that
Alla Baksha, the predecessor of the respondent Nos
1 and 3, and Isthana Miah, the father of the respon-
dent No.2 owned 0.11 acres of land each through
Ramjan Khan, the CS recorded owner. Said Alla
Baksha transferred his 0.11 acres of land to Abdul
Mannaf Munshi who thereupon transferred (0.07
acres of land out of the said lands by registered
kabala dated 11th June, 1966 (Exhibit-1) to Nasir-
uddin alias Nasu and his wife Lazzatunnessa, There-
after he transferred the remaining 0,04 acres of land
to Amjad Hossain, the respondent No.1 and Atal
Hossain, the respondent No.3. Nasiruddin and his
wile transferred 0.03'/, acres of land to the appel-
lants by deed dated 28th March, 1972 and Nasir
uddin gifted the remaining area of the lands to his
wife, who then transferred the said lands in favour
of the plaintifis-appellants by deed dated 10th April
of 1981. the appellants also purchased 0.02 Ui}
land from the respondent No.3 and in this manner
they claimed title in the suit lands, It is claimed that
though the respondent No.3 transferred 0.01 acre of


            
land in favour of the respondent No.3 which was not
an out and out sale but it was a conditional sale to
the effect that the respondent No.1 would recovery
the said lands if the respondent No.3 repaid Taka
00 which he received from the respondent No.1
and ultimately, the respondent No.1 reconveyed the
land on receipt of the consideration amount.

4. The suit was contested by the respondent
Nos. | and 2. Their case, in short, is that Pear Bak-
cha, the predecessor of the respondent Nos. | and 3
yook settlement of 0.11 acres of land out of the suit
8 Khatian from the ex-landlord, and after the death
of Pear Baksha his two sons, the respondent Nos.1
gad 3 and two daughters, the respondent Nos. 5 and
éand wife the respondent No.4 inherited the said
jands. The respondent Nos.1 and 3 have been pos-
sessing the lands over statutory period by making
constructions and thereupon the respondent No.1
transferred 434 ajutangsha land in favour of the
respondent No.2 and his wife Kohinur. Though the
SA Khatian was prepared in the names pear Baksha
and others they have had no possession therein. The
appellants deed are forged and collusive.

5. The learned Subordinate Judge on consid-
eration of the evidence on record decreed the suit in
part declaring the appellants title in respect of 0.11
acres of land on the reasonings that they acquired
title of 0.03'/, acres by deed dated 28th March,
1972, Exhibit-1A, 0.03", acres by deed dated 10th
April, 1981 and 0.02 acres of land by deed dated
29th December, 1986 Exhibit-6. the learned
Subordinate Judge observed that the respondent
No.3, the brother of the respondent No.1 himself
admitted the appellants title and possession in the
suit lands and that Exhibits-Kha and Kha-1 by
which the respondent No.1 is claiming title through
Pear Baskha by way of taking settlement are forged
and collusive papers which had been created for the
purpose of the suit.

6. The High Court Division, on the other
hand, observed that the trial court illegally admitted
the deed dated 11th June 1966, Exhibit 1, as sec-
ondary evidence by which deed Abdul Munnaf

Munshi transferred 0.07 acres of land to Nasiruddin
and his wife in violation of section 65 of the
Evidence Act, inasmuch as, the appellants did not
file the original deed and no explanation was
as to why they did not file the original deed. The
High Court Division further held that there are dis-
crepancies in respect of the appellants claim in the
suit land, inasmuch as, the appellants are claiming
0.03", acres of land by deed dated 10th April, 1941.
Exhibit 8, from Lazzatunnessa in which deed there
is discrepancy in respect of area of lands, that the
appellants have also failed to prove by adducing
reliable evidence about their claim that Amjad
Hossain had gifted 0.01 acre of land to Altaf
Hossain, and that though the respondent No.1 has
failed to prove his case that his predecessor has
taken settlement of 0.11 acres of land from the land-
lord, but the appellants’ will not get a decree from
the weakness of the defendant-respondent’s case.

7. There is no dispute that the appellants pur-
chased 0.07 acres of land from Nasiruddin and his
wife Lazzatunnessa which they got from Abdul
Mannaf Munshi. Mr Bhuiyan drew our attention to
the testimony of Hazi Abul Hossain (PW 1) who
proved Exhibit-1 and submitted that the respondent
No.1 did not raise any objection while admitting
Exhibit-1 as secondary evidence. On perusal of the
evidence of PW | it appeared that defendant-respon-
dent No.1 did not raise any objection at the time of
admitting Exhibit-1 as evidence. In view of the
above, Mr Bhuiyan submits that in the absence of
objection as to the formal proof of Exhibit-! at the
earliest point of time, the High Court Division erred
in law in disbelieving the transfer of 0.07 acres of
land by Abdul Mannaf Munshi in favour of
Nasiruddin and his wife Lazzatunnessa. In support
of his contention the learned Counsel has referred
the cases of Abdullah vs Abdul Karim, 20 DLR (SC)
205, Hazi Waziullah alias Waziullah Miah vs
Additional Deputy Commissioner, 41 DLR (AD) 97.
Joynal Abedin vs Mafizur Rahman, 44 DLR (AD)
162 and Md Kalimuddin vs Md Dukhi Mondal, 11
MLR (AD) 151.


            
8. We noticed that not only the defendant-
respondent No.1 did not raise objection at the time
of admitting Exhibit-1 as evidence, the learned
Advocate for the respondent No.1 did not even raise
this point in the High Court Division and no such
ground was also taken in the memorandum of
appeal. Therefore, we find that the High Court
Division has made out a third case of its own and
disbelieved. the appellants’ acquisition of title in
respect of 0.07 acres of land by way of purchase
from Nasiruddin and Lazzatunnessa.

9. Appellants are claiming title of 0.02 acres
of land by way of purchase from the respondent
No.3 Altaf Hossain by registered deed dated 29th
December, 1986, Exhibit-6. According to the appel-
lants, Abdul Mannaf Munshi sold his remaining
0.04 acres of land to the respondent Nos.1 and 3 out
of which the respondent No.3 sold his share to the
appellants. Altaf Hossain (PW 2), brother of the
respondent No.1 supported the appellants claim of
transfer. According to the appellants the respondent
No.3 sold 0.01 acre of land out of his share of 0.02
acres to his brother the respondent No.1, by regis-
tered deed dated 12th May, 1978 on condition to
Teconvey the said land on receipt of Taka 500. The
respondent No.1 did not admit that he purchased
0.01 acre of land from his brother on condition of
recovery the said land. The leamed Subordinate
Judge on consideration of the evidence of Abdul
Karim (PW 3), Abdur Rob (PW 4) and PW 2
believed the appellants claim.

10. The learned Subordinate Judge also disbe-
lieved the respondent No.1’s claim of title in the suit
lands on the reasoning that if Pear Baksha had
acquired title of 0.11 acres of land by settlement
from the landlord, there was no reason on the part of
the respondent Nos.1 and 3, the sons of Pear Baksha
to purchase 0.04 acres of land form Abdul Mannaf
Munshi and that there was also no reason on the part
of the respondent No.1 to purchase 0.01 acre of land
from his brother by Exhibit 5, In view of the above,
the leamed Subordinate Judge held that the respon-
dent Nos. | and 3 acquired 0.04 acres of land by way
of purchase. The High Court Division observed that

there is no evidence in support of the appellanis
claim that Altaf Hossain returned back 0.01 acre or
land from his brother Amjad Hossain and thus the
appellants could not acquire title of 0.02 acre of lang
by way of purchase of land from Altaf Hossain,

11. The High Court Division misread the evi.
dence of PW 2 and observed that this witness
deposed that his brother gified 0.01 acre of land to
him which is not at all the case of the appellants, As
observed above, the learned Subordinate Judge
notice form the evidence of PWs 2, 3 and 4 that
though Altaf Hossain sold 0.01 acre of land to his
brother Amjad Hossain but it was not an out and out
sale; it was conditional sale to recovery the same
and that PWs 3 and 4 supported the appellants claim
that Altaf Hossain got back this piece of land from
his brother on payment of Taka 500 and thereupon
Amjad Hossain delivered the original deed and then
Altaf Hossain sold his share of 0.02 acres of land to
the appellants. The High Court Division did not
reverse those findings. It is also apparent from the
claim of the respondent No.1 that this Exhibit-1 has
been acted upon, inasmuch as, according to him the
CS, SA, RS, records in respect of the suit lands are
wrong, which claim proves that the records have
been prepared in the name of appellants and their
predecessor. More so, the appellants are in posses-
sion of the suit lands by constructing homestead as
found by the learned Subordinate Judge.

12. In Abdullahs case [20 DLR (SC) 205).
after closing the evidence the defendant produced
records of mutation proceeding which were marked
as Exhibits-D series without objection from the
plaintiff's side. The trial Court admitted the said
records of mutation as evidence but refrained from
considering the same without formal proof thereof.
The question before the Supreme Court was whether
the trial Court was justified in holding. So, II
Rahman, J speaking for the Supreme Court
answered the point as under:

“The Code of Civil Procedure provides for
the admission of documents and it is now well
settled that if objection to the formal proof of a
document has not been taken at the earliest


            
point of time it cannot be taken subsequently
and certainly not in appeal.”

13. In Hazi Waziullah s case [41 DLR(AD) 97),
a photostat copy of a declaration purportedly made
py four brothers of Hamendra Kumar Majumder
who resided in Calcutta before the Pakistan High
Commission at Calcutta that there was an amicable
partition among them by which, the property at
Feni, Bangladesh fell in the share of Hamendra. This
photostat copy. was admitted into evidence without
objection. At a later stage, it was challenged on the
ground that neither the original was produced nor
sry Teason for its non-production was given. The
High Court Division observed that “photostat copy,
which is not even proved legally, could not be
admissible in evidence”. This Division in the con-
text of the matter observed as under :

“Be that as it may, the question as to merit
of this document, Exhibit 16, will arise only if
it is found to be admissible in evidence without
formal proof. We think that though objection
was not raised when it was produced, the party
producing it was not exempted from explaining
in the course of recording evidence why its
original was not produced. Even assuming this
is not admissible in evidence, the appellant’s
case of amicable partition stands independent of
Exhibit 16 as other evidence and circumstances
including the previous judgment are quite sufti-
cient to prove it. An amicable partition like this
between brothers-co-sharers need not be effect-
ed by a registered instrument, as Mr. Pal has
rightly referred to the decision in the case of
Nani Bai vs. Gita Bai, AIR 1958 SC 70.”

14. In Joynul Abedin [44 DLR (AD) 162)]
some kabuliyats, Exhibit ‘D’ series, were filed
before the trial Court and those were admitted into
evidence without any objection from either side. In
the lower Appellate Court also no objection was
raised about the admissibility of these Exhibits, It
was for the first time the objection was taken in the
High Court Division and a Single Bench of the High
Court Division left these kabuliyats out of consider-
ation on the reasoning that the certified copies of the

kabuliyats were filed without calling for the ori
nals thereof. In the context of the matter this Court
held as under:

“Nobody raised the question of formal
proof of thos uliyats and those were admit-
ted in evidence without objection. This being
the position, the kabuliyats, Exhibit D series
were admissible in evidence and the learned
Single Judge of the High Court Division acted
wrongly in not considering those kabuliyats.
Herein, we may mention that the kabuliyat by
Jinnat Ali in favour of Khalil Patwari marked
bit D and D(1) by which he took settlement
of 0.70 acres of land admitted the auction and
by the kabuliyats marked Exhibit D(2) to Dis)
some of the defendants who were heirs of Khalil
Patwary and some other defendants who were
heirs of Jinnat Ali took settlement of the entire
suit land from the auction purchaser landlords.
From the kabuliyat Exhibit D(2) some of heirs
of Jannat Ali and by kabuliyat Exhibit D(3) the
names of plaintiff No.1 and defendant Nos. |
and 2 were mentioned as executants and beneti-
ciaries though only defendant No.1 eldest broth-
er of plaintiff No.1 and defendant No.2 execut-
ed the same and as such they as heirs of Jannat
Ali admitted the auction purchase of the suit
property by the landlord recipient of the kabu-
liyat in Rent Execution Case No.222 of 1950,
Thus, it can be safely said that non-conside!
tion of these vital documents namely, the certi-
fied copies of the kabuliyats which were admit-
ted into evidence without objection had materi-
ally affected the decision in the present case.”

15. The question, whether secondary evidence
was in any given case rightly admitted, is one which
is proper to be decided by the Judge of first nee
and is treated as depending very much on his di:
cretion. Objection to admissibility of secondary evi-
dence should be taken before it is admitted in evi-
dence. Once Secondary evidence-is admitted with-
out objection the Court should not ignore it without
giving reasons. Latter objection to admissibility
cannot be taken to be a secondary evidence once


            
Exhibited without objection even on the ground of
want of proper notice to produce the original,

16. A document which is not relevant to the
issues, even if admitted without objection by the
opposite party, must be discarded by the appellate
Court, that is, if the objection relates to the admissi-
bility of the document itself under the law, such an
objection is available to the party even at the appel-
late stage. But an objection that a document, which
per se is not inadmissible in evidence has been
improperly admitted in evidence in the trial Court
can not be entertained for the first time in the Court
of Appeal. In Gopal Das vs Thakurnji, AIR 1943 PC
§3, their Lordships of the Privy Council observed:

“Where the objection to be taken is not that
the document is in itself inadmissible but that
the mode of proof put forward is irregular or
insufficient it is essential that the objection
should be taken at the trial before the document
is marked as an Exhibit and admitted to the
record. A party cannot lie by until the case
comes before a Court of appeal and then com-
plain for the first time of the mode of proof.”

17. Itis not the case that the deed, Exhibit 1, is
inadmissible evidence — the mode of proof of this
document is irregular and for this reason this docu-
ment can not be kept out of consideration since the
respondent No.] has not raised objection about the
reception of evidence at any stage of the proceed-
ings. More so, this deed has been acted upon is evi-
dent from the materials on record. If a party waives
proof of circumstances justifying the giving of sec-
ondary evidence, he cannot raise the objection in
appeal, but consent or want of objection to the
wrong manner in which relevant evidence should be
brought on record of the suit disentitles parties from
objecting to such evidence in a Court of appeal.
Thus it is found that the High Court Division not
only on a misconception of law but also on mis-
reading and non consideration of the evidence on
record disbelieved the appellants claim of acquisi-
tion of title of 0,09 acres of land,

18. Ina suit for declaration of title the Court is

required to decide the possession of the partie, in
the suit land. As regards possession, the learneg
Subordinate Judge on consideration of the evidence
on record particularly of the admission of Altar
Hossain (PW 2) believed the appellants Possession
in the suit lands. PWs 4 and 5 also corroborated the
evidence of PW2. Esthanu Miah (DW 2) in course
of cross examination expressed his ignorance as to
who possessed how much area of land, and who sold
how much area of land. This witness impliedly sup.
ported the case of the appellants. Din Mohammad
(DW 4) in course of cross-examination expressed
his ignorance as to whether the appellants have their
homestead in the suit lands and that whether Nasu
and Lazzatunnessa sold their lands to the appellants.
He admitted that Altaf Hossain had been in posses-
sion of the homestead transferred by Lazzatunnessa
and Naser. Therefore, the respondent’s witnesses
have impliedly admitted the possession of the appel-
lants in the suit property. The High Court did not at
all consider the possession of the parties in the suit
lands, although the respondent No.1! is claiming
adverse possession.

19. Section 110 of the Evidence Act provides
for a presumption of ownership in favour of the per-
son who is in possession of the property. A person in
possession of land however imperfect his title may
be, has a good title against whole world except the
true owner and until the true owner comes in Court
to assert a claim to the property. Possession is evi-
dence of title, and gives a good title as against
wrong doer. The High Court Division, in the prem-
ises, fell in an error in reversing the judgment of the
learned Subordinate Judge without adverting to the
findings arrived at as regards acquisition title and
possession of the suit lands by the appellants. On
consideration of the fact and circumstances of the
matter, we are of the view that the High Court
Division erred in law in disbelieving the appellants
title in the suit lands.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed without any
order as to costs.



            
The

Dhaka Law Report

Volume LXII
2010

Reports of the Decisions of the High Court Division
of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh

HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Special Original Jurisdiction)

syed Mahmud Hossain J | SAH Monowar Ali and

Quamrul Islam Siddiqui J} others.........Petitioners
VS

Chairman, BJMC and

Judgment others....... Contemner-
April 23rd, 2009 Respondents*

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 108

Application preferred to punish the respon-
dent for deliberate violation of the judgment in
the writ petition. The Court has disposed of the
application upon reasonings : No proceedings
for contempt can be founded on the alleged vio-
lation of an order which is not clear and specific
and which is by its own terms of a contingent
character, the direction contained in it being
dependent on certain other facts which are left
undetermined by the order.

True the order of termination has been
declared to be illegal and without lawful author-
ity. As the termination of the petitioners was
declared illegal and without lawful authority,
Jegal interpretation would that there was no
order of termination in the eye of law and

*Contempt Petition No.181 of 2007.

employment of the petitioners continued. If the
employees could not render service during the
period of termination, it is due to the action of the
employers for which employees could not be
refused payment of salary during that period.
Only if it can be shown that the employees were
gainfully employed elsewhere during the period
of termination, they will not be entitled to salary
during that period as per the doctrine of unjust
enrichment.

However, as there is no specific direction for
payment of arrear salary during the period of
termination and as it involves certain questions
requiring adjudication, the employers cannot be
said to have disobeyed the order of the Court in
not paying the arrear salary to which the employ-
ees are entitled.

In view of the discussions made we find that
the contemners-respondents are not guilty of
contempt of Court. However, having regard to
the decision of the Appellate Division in the
aforementioned case, 2001 BLD (AD) 41 = 53
DLR (AD) 41, we expect that the employer being
a statutory corporation will pay the arrear salary
to the employees immediately. . .....(19, 20, 2


            
Md Salimullah Khan vs State 15 DLR (SC) 150; State
of Pakistan vs Mehrajuddin, 11 DLR (SC) 260 ; Subhash
Chandra Patiher Dr vs Leena Chakroborty, 1995 CrLJ at
71S (Cal); Dulal Chandra Bhar Sukumar Banerjee 1958
CrLJ 1163 and Secretary Ministry of Establishment vs AM
Nurunnabi, 2001 BLD (AD) 41 = 53 DLR (AD) 41 ref.

Ma Salaluddin Dolon, Advocate—For the Petitioners,

Rabia Bhuiyan, Advocate—For the Contemner-

Respondents.

Judgment

Quamrul Islam Siddiqui J: In this application for
Contempt under Article 108 of the Constitution, a
Rule was issued calling upon the contemners-
respondents to show cause as to why they should not
be proceeded against for contempt of Court for vio-
lating the judgment and order dated 26-8-2003
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition
Nos. 7127, 4560 and 4702 of 2002 and/or such other
or further order or orders passed as to this Court may
seem fit and proper.

2. The facts leading to the issuance of the
Rule, in brief, are

The petitioners were employees of he Bangla-
desh Jute Mills Corporation (shortly, BJMC) and
their services were terminated on 29-8-2002. 86 ter-
minated employees had preferred Writ Petitions
against the said order of termination. A Division
Bench of this Court passed a common judgment on
26-8-2003 declaring the order of termination as ille-
gal and void. Against the same judgment. BJMC
preferred Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal
Nos.354, 598 and 599 of 2004 which were dis-
missed. Thereafter, a review Petition being No.111
of 2005 preferred against the judgment was also dis-
missed on 30-11-2006, Accordingly, the judgment
passed in Writ Petition Nos. 7127, 4560 and 4702 of
2002 became final and binding on BJMC
Subsequently, BJMC cancelled the order of termina-
tion and allowed the petitioners to join in their post.
The legal consequence of the judgment was that the
petitioners must be deemed to have never been ter-
minated and that they were in service. Therefore.

they are entitled to all faciliti including Pay ang
other fringe benefits. The petitioners are also enti.
ted to get the arrear salary during the period of te,
mination. Accordingly, the petitioners requested the
BJMC to pay them the arrear salary for the periog
they were kept out of service illegally. But BIMc
did not pay their arrear salary. After the dismissal of
the Review Petition on 30-11-2006, the petitioness
again requested BJMC to pay their outstanding
arrear salary for the period from 1-9-2002 till their
reinstatement, but no action was taken. In such cir.
cumstances, the petitioners served notice demand.
ing justice upon the respondents.

3. Respondents replied to the legal notice and
stated that there was no specific direction from the
Court to pay the arrear salary to the petitioners
Under such circumstances, the petitioners finding
no other alternative preferred the present application
under Article 108 of the Constitution to punish the
respondents for deliberate violation of the judgment
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition
Nos. 4560, 4702, 4618 and 4628 of 2002.

4. Respondent Nos. 1-3 entered appearance
by filing affidavit-in-opposition controverting all
the material statements made in the Contempt
Petition. However, the case of respondent Nos. 1-3,
in short, is that following the judgment of the High
Court Division and the Appellate Division, the peti.
tioners were re-instead to their services and that they
were posted in different Mills and that they have
been serving in those Mills. The petitioners are enti-
tled to claim salary when they work. But they can-
not claim salary for the period they did not work.
There is no specific direction by the High Court
Division to pay back salaries and fringe benefits to
the petitioners and they also did not pray for that.
There was no order in the judgment of the Civil
Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 354, 598 and 599
of 2004 that the petitioners would be deemed to
have been never terminated. There was also no
direction by the High Court Division for giving the
back salaries and fringe benefits to the petitioners
from the date of termination till their reinstatement.
The respondents have not flouted any order of the


            
Court nor showed least disregard to the Court's
order. For the reasons stated the Rule is liable to be
discharged with costs,

5. Mr Md Salahuddin Dolon, learned Advo-
cate appearing on behalf of the petitioners, submits
that the respondents illegally terminated the peti-
tioners from service and that the order of termina-
tion was declared illegal by the High Court Division
in several Writ Petitions. He further submits that in
the judgment of the High Court Division it has been
stated in no uncertain terms that the order of termi-
nation is illegal, void, unconstitutional and without
Jawful authority. He again submits that BJMC pre-
fered Civil Petitions for Leave to Appeal against
the judgment and order passed by the High Court
Division Which were dismissed by the Appellate
Division. He lastly submits that as the order of ter-
mination was declared illegal by the High Court
Division and that as the judgment of the High Court
Division was confirmed by the Appellate Division
the petitioners should be deemed to have been con-
tinuing in service and that they are entitled to get all
the arrear salaries, fringe benefits and other facili-
ties.

6. Ms Rabia Bhuiyan, learned Advocate
appearing for the contemners-respondent Nos.1-3,
submits that following the judgment of the High
Court Division and the Appellate Division the peti-
tioners were reinstated to their service and that they
have been serving in different Mills. She further
submits that there is no specific direction in the
judgment of the High Court Division for giving
arrear salary to the petitioners. She again submits
that as there was no specific directioir‘in the judg-
ment of the High Court Division, the petitioners
were not entitled to get the arrear salary, fringe ben-
efits and other facilities. She lastly submits that the
respondents do not have intention to show any dis-
regard to the order of the Court and that in fact, the
respondents did not violate the order of the Court.

7. We have perused the Contempt Petition, its
Annexures, affidavit-in-opposition, its annexures.
and other connected papers.

8. It is true that the petitioners were serving in
different capacities under Bangladesh Jute Mills
Corporation (BJMC) and that at one point of time
the respondents terminated them from service.
Against that order of termination, the petitioners
preferred Writ Petition Nos.7127, 4560 and 4702 of
2002 in the High Court Division which were made
absolute.

9. Annexure-A is the copy of the judgment of
the High Court Division. It appears from Annexure-
A that a Division bench of this Court declared the
order of termination as illegal and void. For proper
appreciation, let us quote the order portion of the
judgment which runs as follows :

"In light of the above, it is evident to this
Court that the arbitrary decision by respondent
No.1 as to effect by respondent No.2 to issue
wholesale termination letters is a clear manifes-
tation of gross abuse of power and is thus with-
out any lawful authority and of no legal effect.
The Rule in each of the Writ Petitions before
this Court is therefore, made absolute partially
in terms of declaring the impugned orders dated
29-8-2002 issued by the respondent No.2 as
having been made without legal authority and
being unconstitutional and void as being in vio-
lation of the petitioner's rights under ‘Articles
27, 29 and 31 of the Constitution.”

10. Against the Judgment of the High Court
Division the respondents preferred Civil Petitions
for Leave to Appeal before the Appellate Division.
Annexure-B is the judgment of the Appellate Divi-
sion passed in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal
No.354 of 2004. In that judgment the Appellate
Division observed as under:

"In the instant case from the materials on
record it is seen that BJMC acted illegally or for
that matter Government in terminating the serv-
ice of the writ petitioners did not act reasonably
and fairly.

In the background of the discussions made
hereinabove, we find no substance in the peti-
tion. Accordingly, the petition is dismissed.”

            
11. From the above two judgments of the High
Court Division and the Appellate Division, we find
that the order of termination passed by the respon-
dents was illegal, However, following the judgment
of the High Court Division and the Appellate
Division the respondents reinstated the petitioners to,

their service.

12. Now, the moot question is whether the
respondents committed offence under the Contempt
of Courts Act as they failed to give salary and other
benefits to the petitioners for the period they were
out of service because of the order of termination. In
fact, there is no codified definition of Contempt of
Courts. It has been observed in the case of Sudhir
Chandra Roy Chowdhury, an Attorney (1952 CrLJ
666 (Cal High Court) (Special Branch) at page 670-
673) AIR 1952 Cal 258/as under:

"Itis extremely difficult to define the term
‘contempt of court, generally, however, it may
be said to be constituted by any conduct that
tends to bring the authority and administration
of the law into disrespect or disregard, or to
interfere with or prejudice the parties litigating
or their witnesses during litigation.......Speaking
of the powers of a court to punish for contempt
Oswald in his book "Contempt of Court, 3rd
Ed., p.17 observes. "It should always be borne
in mind in considering and dealing with con-
tempt of court that it is an offence purely sui
generis, and that is punishment involves in
most cases and exceptional interference with
the liberty of the subject, and that too by a
method or process which would in no other case
be permissible, or even tolerate.

13. Similar observations were also made in the
case of Md Salimullah Khan vs State 15 DLR (SC)
150.

14. In the case referred to above, the Supreme
Court of Pakistan has observed as under :

The categories of con-
‘empl are so manifold that it is not possible to
attempt an exhaustive classification of what

may or may not constitute a contempt, but gen-
erally speaking any conduct that tends to bring
the administration of law by a Court into disre-
spect or to contumaciously disregard its process
or to interfere with or prejudice parties or their
witnesses during the litigation amounts to a
contempt. But at the same time we must point
out in the words of the Judicial Committee of
the Privy Council in the case of Shamdasani vs
King Emperor (1), which were re-emphasised
in the recent case of Izuora vs Queen (2), that
this power "Should be used sparingly and only
in serious cases” and that Courts should not be
either unduly touchy or over-astut
ing new varieties of contempt, for, "its useful.

ness depends on the wisdom and restraint with

which it is exercised". It appears to us to be

desirable, when considering whether a particu.

lar act amounts to a contempt or not, to balance

on the one hand the effects it might have on the

litigation with, on the other, the wider public

interest of extending to the litigant public the

freedom of conducting their litigations without

being constantly under the threat of conviction

for contempt and only if on the balance there is

a benefit to the public interest in the wider®
sense, this power should be utilised. Even oth-
erwise, where normally some other adequate
method is available for correcting the intransi-
gence, recalcitrance or contumacy of a part ora
witness or for compelling obedience to the
orders of the Court, then this power should not

be invoked.

in a contempt proceed-
ing a reprimand is a recognised mode of pun-
ishment where the offence is not grave. It is no
less as formal and public a stigmatisation of an
offence addressed by a Judge to a convicted
person as the imposition of an insignificant sum
as a fine or a detention for an insignificant peri-
od of time."

15. In the case of State of Pakistan vs
Mehrajuddin, 1 DLR (SC) 260 the Supreme Court
of Pakistan has held as follows:

            
“It remains to consider the propriety of the
proceedings these eases by the High Court. Itis true that the usual method of enforcing a judgment granting an order of mandamus is by commitment for
contempt, but such a mandamus must be of an
absolute nature.

An contempt commenced in two of

An order directing the reinstatement of a
person ina great public Department is not one
which can be executed on the instant. It
involves a great many considerations such as
seniority, suitability, salary, and treatment of the
period of absence, etc., which are exclusively
within the competence of the relevant executive
authorities and can only be decided by those
authorities after a good deal of examination and
care, involving the exercise of discretion and
judgment in regard to many complex matters.
Therefore, an order directing the reinstatement
of a person cannot be regarded as an absolute
order of mandamus, non-compliance with
which peremptorily be visited by a proceeding
in contempt.

16. In the case of Dulal Chandra Bhar
Sukumar Banerjee 1958 CrLJ 1163 it has been held
as under:

"Court observed that if contempt is sought
to be founded on a breach of a mandatory order,
the same cannot be done unless it is shown that
the mandatory order directed the alleged con-
temner to do a particular thing by a particular
date or on a particular day and that he had not
carried out the direction.”

17. In the above case, it has been further
observed as under:

"The jurisdiction in contempt, as 1 have
said before, is a very special jurisdiction and is
certainly a jurisdiction which it is necessary for
the superior Courts to have and exercise when-
ever it is found that something has been done
which tends to affect the administration of jus-
tice or which tends to impede its course or tends

to affect public confidence in the ability of the
courts to enforce their order."

18. Another question is pertinent here, whether
in a contempt proceeding Court is competent to
issue necessary further consequential direction. In
the case of Subhash Chandra Patiher Dr vs Leena
Chakroborty, 1995 CrLJ at 715 (Cal) it has been
observed that there could be no mistaking that in the
contempt application Court is competent to issue
necessary further consequential directions for
enforcing its order. [Ref Iyer's Law on Contempt of
Courts Act, 1971, Revised by Sarinder K Pari
Senior Advocate Delhi High Court, assisted by
Board of Editors 3rd Edition 2007 190]

19. No proceedings for contempt can be found-
ed on the alleged violation of an order which is not
clear and specific and which is by its own terms of
a_contingent character, the direction contained in it
being dependent on certain other facts which are left

undetermined by the order and remain to be deter-

mined, (emphasis supplied)

20. Now, let us turn to our case. In the facts
and circumstances of the instant case, we are to see
whether the respondents committed any offence
under the contempt of Courts Act as they failed to
give the arrear salary, fringe benefits and other facil-
ities to the petitioners during the period of their ter-
mination, It is true that the order of termination has
been declared to be illegal and without lawful
authority. As the termination of the petitioners was
declared illegal and without lawful authority, legal
interpretation would be that there was no order of
termination in the eye of law and employment of the
petitioners continued. If the employees could not
render service during the period of termination, it is
due to the action of the employers for which
employees could not be refused payment of salary
during that period. Only if it can be shown that the
employees were gainfully employed elsewhere dur-
ing the period of termination, they will not be enti-
tled to salary during that period as per the doctrine
of unjust enrichment.

            
21. It is true that in the instant case there is no
clear and specific order for giving the arrear salary,
fringe benefit and other benefits to the petitioners.
But the facts remain that the employment of the
petitioners continued, Considering this fact, we are

of the view that the petitioners are entitled to salary
during the period they were out of job following the
order of termination. Our this view finds support
from the case of Secretary Ministry of Establishment
vs AM Nurunnabi, reported in 2001 BLD (AD) 41 =
53 DLR (AD) 41. In the case referred to above the
Appellate Division has held that the period of
absence of Government servant on reinstatement in
service after wrongful retirement shall be treated as
a period spent on duty and he will be entitled to pay
and allowances as admissible under clause (a) of the
Rule. Clause (a) of Rule 72 speaks that in case of
honourable acquittal the incumbent is entitled to full
pay to which he would have been entitled if he had
not been dismissed or removed or suspended. In
that view of the matter the Administrative Appellate
Tribunal rightly held that the respondent is entitled
to the arrear pay and allowance. *

22. However, as there is no specific direction
for payment of arrear salary during the period of ter-
mination and as it involves certain questions requir-
ing adjudication, the employers cannot be said to
have disobeyed the order of the Court in not paying
the arrear salary to which, in our opinion, the
employees are entitled.

23. In view of the discussions made hereinbe-
fore, we find that the contemners-respondents are
not guilty of contempt of Court. However, having
regard to the decision of the Appellate Division in
the aforementioned case, 200] BLD (AD) 41 = 53
DLR (AD) 41, we expect that the employer being a
statutory corporation will pay the arrear salary to the
employees immediately,

In the result, the Rule is discharged without any
order as to costs.



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction)

Siddique Rahman Miah J | Kazi Ranimul Islam .

Md Abdul HafizJ | Appellant
Judgment vs
May 4th, 2008 State.........Respondent*

Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 107 8

Under section 107 of the Penal Code a man is
said to abet a thing if he incites a man or con-
spires with others or aids the doing of the mis-
chief. The mere giving of aid will not make an act
of abetment of offence. Mere presence without
proof of any act or common intention will not
cause an offence of abetment.

Section 34
To sustain a charge of abetment it is neces-

aeed (51)

sary that there must exist some evidence of an
overt act so as to suggest a pre-concert or to sug-
gest the existence of a conspiracy, committed out
of a common design to commit a particular
offence committed in consequence of the inst
tion or in the aid of offence.

aeey (56)

Evidence Act (1 of 1872)
Section 68

Where a police officer is the informant as well
as the investigating officer, the evidence of such
witness requires sufficient corroboration. ........(68)

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 342

It is the fundamental principle of law that
the attention of the accused must be drawn to the
evidence on record in a precise manner. ..........(70)

Mahiruddin Mondal vs State 57 DLR 779;
Toyezuddin Pramanik vs State 1981 BLD 433; Gaziur
Rahman vs State 1991 BLD 11; State vs Manu Miah 34
DLR (AD) 60; State vs Kabel Mollah 55 DLR 108;
Ibrahim vs State 58 DLR 598; Rahij vs State 1984 BLD

* Criminal Appeal No. 2565 of 1998.

            
44 = 35 DLR 439; Abdur Rashid vs State 8 BLC 513;
Ananda vs State 41 DLR bir Mia 1) BLT
294 = 8 BLC 235; Nannu Gazi vs Awlad Hossain 43 DLR
(AD) 63; Younus vs State 8 BLT 245; Asaddar Ali vs
State 1989 BLD 187; Anis Ali Master ys State 1985 BLD
318 and Mirazul Islam vs State 41 DLR (AD) 157 ref.

Sarwar Ahmed with Humayan Kabir, Advocates—
For the Appellant.

SM Shahjahan Kabir, Assistant Auorney-General—
For the State/Respondent,

Judgment

Siddiqur Rahman Miah J: This Criminal Appeal
atthe instance of Kazi Ramimul Islam under section
4 (Kha)/9 of the Cruelty to Women (Deterrent
Punishment) Ordinance, 1983 (hereinafter referred
to as ‘the Ordinance’) is directed against the judg-
ment and order dated 14-10-1998 passed by the
learned Judge, Special Tribunal No.4, Satkhira
(hereinafter referred to as the "Tribunal’) in Special
Tribunal Case No.197 of 1995 arising out of GR
Case No.118 of 1995 corresponding to Satkhira
police station case No. 43 dated 26-3-1995 convict-
ing accused appellant Kazi Ramimul Islam under
section 4(kha)/9 of the Ordinance, sentencing him
thereunder to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
7(seven) years and also to pay a fine of Taka 1000 in
default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period
of one month more.

2. Prosecution case stated briefly, is that on
25-3-1995 at about 21-15 hours, they came to know
that a girl has been abducted from Puratan Satkhira
area; that the sister of the victim girl, Shikha Rani,
was waiting at Puratan Satkhira police camp; that on
the basis of that information, the informant made a
GD entry being GD entry No.1168 dated 25-3-1995
and rushed to Puratan Satkhira police camp and
interrogated Shikha Rani; that on interrogation, she
admitted that at about 9-15 PM when the victim
along with her sister Shikha Rani, brother-in-law
Niranjan Karma brother Ratan Karmakar and
brother's wife Molina Rani were returning home
afler performing Puja at Kalimondir and when they
reached near Munshipara ‘morh', then they found a

microbus on the road; that when the informant party
reached there, then those persons compelled them to
stop the rickshaws and on the point of Ramda, they
snatched away her sister, Shikha Rani, from her
rickshaw and compelled the victim to get into the
microbus and thereafter left the place towards
Ashasuni. It is further stated that finding no other
alternative, she informed the matter to TSI of
Puraton Satkhira Police Camp; that the informant
interrogated the husband of Shikha Rani who admit-
ted that he gave proposal to marry his sister-in-law,
the victim Rina Karmakar, but his wife and Rina
Karmakar denied that proposal, then Niranjan
Karmaker decided to marry the victim forcibly and
that accordingly he made a conspiracy with Abdur
Rahman, Kazi Islam, Dolan and Kumu that on 25-3-
1995 they would abduct the victim and compel her
to marry Niranjan Karmaker after shifting her at vil-
lage Budhahata. It is further stated that getting such
information, the informant and local commissioner
Elias rushed to the village Budhahata and recovered
the victim Rina Karmaker from the house of one
Abdul Gafur; that they also arrested the accused
appellant Kazi Islam; that on interrogation Rina
Karmakar disclosed that the accused Rani and 4/5
others abducted her on point of Ramda and brought
her at village Budhahata and that she also disclosed
that her brother-in-law Niranjon Karmaker did so
for the purpose of marrying her against her will. So
the informant lodged the first information report.

3. SI Ataur Rahman, took up the investiga-
tion, visited the place of occurrence, prepared sketch
map with separate index of the place of occurrence,
examined the witnesses and recorded their state-
ments under section 161 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. He also produced the victim before the
competent Magistrate for recording her statement
under section 164 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. Thereafter he submitted charge sheet
being No.176 dated 17-6-1995 against the accused
appellant under sections 4(Kha)/9 of the Ordinance.

4, The case ultimately came to the Court of
the learned Judge, Special Tribunal No.4, Satkhira
which was registered as Special Tribunal case No.
197 of 1995 and the learned Judge, on the basis of

            
the materials available on record, framed charge
against the accused zi Islam under secti
4(Kha)/9 of the Ordinance and read it over to him in
open Court to which he pleaded not guilty and
demanded trial.

The prosecution examined 7 witnesses who
were cross-examined by the defence and the defence
did not adduce any evidence.

6. After close of the examination of the pros-
ecution witnesses, the accused appellant was exam-
ined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure to which he repeated his innocence and
the defence did not adduce any evidence on his
behalf.

7. The defence case as it transpires from the
trend of cross- examination of the PWs and the sug-
gestions put forward on his behalf is that he is inno-
cent and he has been falsely implicated in the case
out of previous enmity and grudge.

8. On consideration of the facts and circum-
stances of the case and evidence on record, the
learned Judge, was pleased to award the conviction
against accused Kazi Islam under sections 4(Kha)/9
of the Ordinance and sentenced him thereunder to
suffer imprisonment for 7(seven) years and also to
pay a fine of Taka 1000 in default to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for one month more.

9. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with
the conviction and sentence dated 14-10-1998
passed by the learned Judge of the Tribunal No. 4,
Satkhira in Special Tribunal Case No. 197 of 1995,
the appellant has come up with the present appeal
which is opposed by the respondent State through
the learned Assistant Attorney-General.

10. Mr Sarwar Ahmed, the learned Advocate
for the present appellant, took us through the FIR,
charge sheet, charge so framed, the deposition of the
prosecution witnesses, the impugned judgment and
order and the materials available in the paper book
and submits that appellant is quite innocent and he
has been falsely implicated in this case out of previ-
ous enmity and grudge; that the trial Court did not
apply his judicial mind in analysing the deposition

of PWs and their cross-examinations and that the
learned trial Court has based his judgment on sur-
mises and conjectures and not on legal evidence on
record. He further submits that the prosecution has
miserably failed to prove the case against the appel-
lant Kazi Islam beyond all reasonable doubts and
that the order of conviction and sentence is bad in
law as well as on facts and circumstances of the ca
and, as such, the impugned judgment and order of
conviction and sentence is liable to be set aside.

11. The learned Advocate for the appellant
cited the decisions in the case of Mahiruddin
Mondal alias Md Mohiruddin Mondal vs State
reported in 57 DLR 779, in the case of Toyezuddin
Pramanik vs State reported in 1981 BLD 433, in the
case of Gaziur Ku/iman vs State reported in 1991
BLD 11, in the case of State vs Manu Miah reported
in 54 DLR (AD) 60, in the case of State vs Kabel
Mollah reported in 55 DLR 108, in the case of
Ibrahim vs State reported in 58 DLR 598, in the case
of Rahij alias Ghatoo vs State reported in 1984 BLD
44 = 35 DLR 439 and in the case of Ali vs State
reported in /989 BLD 187 in support of his con-
tention.

12.Mr SM Shahjahan Kabir, the learned
Assistant Attomey-General for the State, on the
other hand, submits that the prosecution has proved
its case against the appellant by most consistent,
corroborative, overwhelming and competent wit-
nesses. He further submits that the learned Judge of
the Tribunal was perfectly justified in convicting
and sentencing the appellant on the basis of the most
cogent and reliable evidence and that his judgment
does not suffer froni any mis-reading and non-read-
ing of evidence. He further submits that all the pros-
ecution witnesses are natural, probable and compe-
tent witnesses and there is no internal points of
falsehood in their evidence on any point and, as
such, the impugned judgment calls for no interfer-
ence by this Court.

13. In the face of arguments advanced by the
learned Advocates of the contending parties, we are
now called upon to scrutinise the material evidence
on record in order to come to a proper decision in
this appeal.

            
14. PW 1, SI Ataur Rahman, is the informant

of this case. He deposed that on 25-3-1995 at about
2-15 hours they came to know that a girl has been
abducted from Puratan Satkhira area; that the sister
of the victim girl, Shikha Rani, was waiting. at
puraton Satkhira police camp; that on the basis of
that information, the informant made a GD entry
peing GD entry No. 1168 dated 25-3-1995 and
rushed (0 Puraton Satkhira police camp and interro-
gated Shikha Rani; that on interrogation she admit-
ted that at about 9-15 PM when the victim along
vith her sister, Shikha Rani, brother-in-law Niranjan
Xanmakar, brother Ratan Karmaker and brother's
wife Molina Rani were returning home after per-
forming Puja at Kali Mondir and when reached near
‘Munshipara Morh’, then they found a microbus on
the road and there were 5/6 persons standing on the
road; that when the victim and others reached there,
then those persons compelled them to stop the rick-
shaws and also compelled the victim to get in the
microbus and thereafter left the place towards
Ashasuni; that finding no other alternative, Shikha
Rani, sister of the victim, informed the matter to TSI
of Puraton Satkhira police camp; that the informant
interrogated accused Niranjan, the husband of
Shikha Rani, who admitted that he gave proposal to
marry his sister-in-law, the victim Rina Karmaker,
but his wife and Rina Karmaker denied that propos-
al, then Niranjan Karmaker decided to marry the
victim forcibly and that accordingly he made a con-
spiracy with Abdur Rahman, Kazi Islam, Dolan and
Kumu that on 25-3-1995 they would abduct the vic-
tim and compelled her to marry Niranjan Karmaker
after shifting her at village Budhahata. He further
deposed that getting such information the informant
and local commissioner, Elias, rushed at the village
Budhahata and recovered the victim Rina Karmaker
from the house of one Abdul Gafur and arrested
Kazi Islam; that on interrogation Rina Karmaker
disclosed that the accused and 4/5 others abducted
her on the point of ramdao and brought her at village
Budhahata and that she also disclosed that accused
Niranjon, her brother in law, did so for the purpose
of marrying her against her will. He further
deposed that producing the accused Islam and vic-
tim Rina Karmaker in Satkhira police station, he
ne 2

filed ejahar, He proves that ejahar marked as
Exhibit | and his signature theron is marked as
Exhibit 1/1. He also identifies the accused Islam in
the dock.

15. This witness as investigating officer
deposed that he getting the task of investigation, he
visited the place of occurrence, prepared sketch map
with separate index, examined the witnesses and
recorded their statements under section 16] of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. He also produced the
victim before the competent Magistrate for record-
ing her statement under section 164 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and after investigation being
satisfied, he submitted charge sheet being No. 176
dated 17-6-1995 against the accused appellant under
section 4(Kha)/9 of the Ordinance. He further
deposed that he seized microbus through seizure list
marked as Exhibit 3 and placed the same in the jima
of its proprietor and jimanama is marked as Exhibit
6. He proves sketch map marked Exhibit 4 and his
signature thereon is marked as Exhibit 4/1 and index
marked Exhibit 5 and his signature thereon is
marked Exhibit 5/1.

16. In the cross- examination, he stated that the
house of Nur Miah and Sahadat Hossain are around
the place of occurrence who were not examined and
made witnesses. He denied the defence suggestion
that the victim was not abducted; that the victim
confessed as per his dictation and that he has not
investigated the case properly and has submitted
perfunctory charge sheet being biased.

17. PW 2 Abdul Gafur, deposed that he found
the victim Rina Karmaker in the house of Quddus:
that on enquiry, the victim told him that she came
there with her Dulabhai (brother-in-law) named
Niranjan who went to a person for collecting sale
proceeds of ornament and that the accused Islam is
her Dulabhai's friend. At this stage, this witness was
declared hostile. In the cross-examination by the
prosecution, he stated that the victim was not
abducted and that accused Niranjan is the brother-
in-law (Dulabhai) of the victim and he came there
with him. He denied the defence suggestion that the
victim was not abducted for the purpose of marrying
by the accused Niranjan.


            
18. In the cross-examination of the accused
appellant, he stated that the victim did not tell him
that she was abducted and that she came to
Budhahata voluntarily with her brother-in-law
accused Niranjan.

19. PW 3 Ahia was tendered by the prosecution
and the defence also declined to cross-examine him.

20. PW 4, Mokammel Hoque, deposed that his
house is at Satkhira; that he heard that the victim
fled away with her brother-in-law and that they were
caught by the police at Budhahata,

21. In cross-examination, he stated that he did
not hear anything about the abduction of the victim
and that the victim lives in India.

22. PW 5, SI Abdul Sukur Mollah, is one of the
members of rescue party. He deposed that getting
the information of abduction of victim, he and oth-
ers under the leadership of SI] Ataur Rahman went to
Budhahata and recovered the victim from the house
of Abdul Gafur and apprehended the victim with
accused Niranjan; that after recovery, the victim told
them that the accused Niranjan wanted to marry her
but she and her sister did not agree for which
accused Niranjan along with others abducted her.

23. He stated in his cross-examination that the
victim was not abducted and that being instigated by
the enemies of the accused, the present case was filed.

24. PW 6 Mr Golam Mostafa was the
Magistrate, First Class, Satkhira during the relevant
time. He deposed that he recorded the statement of
victim Rina Karmaker on 27-3-1995 under section
164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. He identi-
fies the statement marked Exhibit 2 and his signa-
ture therein is marked as Exhibit 2/1.

25. In the cross- examination, he stated that on
swearing an affidavit the victim Rina Karmaker told
him that nobody abducted her.

26. PW 7, constable No. 294 Abdul Majid, is
one of the members of the rescue party. He deposed
that they under the leadership of SI Ataur Rahman
rescued the victim Rina Karmaker from the house of
Abdul Gafur of Budhahata.

27. These are all the evidence adduced by the
prosecution.

28. In the wake of the contentions advanced
from Bar, the points which out last for determination
are:

1. How far the prosecution has succeeded in
driving home the charge to the doors of
convict appellant beyond any speck of
doubt;

2. Whether the verdict of conviction and
sentence awarded upon convict appellant
Kazi Islam can be sustained in law, evi-
dence, materials on record, facts and cir-
cumstances of the case and also in the
true dispensation of justice; and

3. Whether the convict appellant can be lib-
erated of the charge levelled against him
on bestowing a Ruling of acquittal on
finding him not guilty of the charge.

29. In approaching and answering to the points
drawn up, the cardinal principles of criminal
jurisprudence in awarding conviction followed by
sentence upon an indicted person demands medita-
tion. A legal survey of law, appraisal of evidence,
browsing eye on materials brought on record, analy-
sis of fact and circumstance of the case, inherent
infirmities disturbing and striking facts of prosecu-
tion case are also required to be taken into consider-
ation. Rival contentions surged forward from both
sides shall be also addressed and considered by us.

30. Fundamental principles of criminal
jurisprudence and justice delivery system is the
innocence of the alleged accused who should be pre-
sumed to be innocent until the charges are proved
beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of clear,
cogent and credible evidence and that onus of prov-
ing everything essential to the establishment of
charge against the accused lies upon the prosecution
which must prove charge substantially as laid to hilt
and beyond all reasonable doubt on the strength of
clear, cogent, credible and unimpeachable evidence.
Ina criminal trial, the burden of proving the guilt of
the accused beyond all reasonable doubts always
rests on the prosecution and on its failure, it cannot

            
fall back upon the evidence adduced by the accused
in support of his defence to rest its case solely there-
on. Proof of charge must depend upon judicial eval-
uation of totality of evidence, oral and circumstan-
tial, and not by an isolated scrutiny. Prosecution
version is also required to be judged taking into
account the overall circumstances of the case with a
practical, Pragmatic and reasonable approach in
appreciation of evidence.

31. It is always to be remembered that justice
delivery system cannot be carried away by heinous
nature of crime or by gruesome manner in which it
was found to have been committed and graver the
charge is greater is the standard of proof required. It
should also bear in mind that if the accused can cre-
ate any doubts by adducing evidence or cross-
examining the PWs in the prosecution case, the
accused is entitled to get benefit of doubt. It is con-
veniently observed that though sad, yet it is a fact
that in our country, there is a tendency on the part of
the people to rope in as many people as possible for
facing trial in respect of any criminal case. It has
been even found that innocent person, including
aged, infirm and rivals, are booked for standing on
dock. Some are acquitted by the Court of first
instance and some by appellate Court, but only hav-
ing been in incarceration for years. Such efforts on
the part of relatives of victim and other interested
persons invariably is done and thus it becomes diffi-
cult on the part of a Court to find out the real culprit.
Under such circumstances and in view of the preva-
lent criminal jurisprudential system, a judge is to
find out the truth from a bundle of lies and to shift
the grain out of chaff. A Judge does not preside over
a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent person
is punished. A judge, also presides to see that guilty
man does not escape. Both are public duties. Law
therefore, cannot afford any favour other than truth
and only truth.

32. In the touchstone of the above stated prin-
ciples of criminal jurisprudence, the points formu-
lated are being addressed.

33. The accused appellant was convicted under
section 4 (kha)/9 of the Ordinance.

34, The allegations against the accused appel-
lant Kazi Islam are that he and 4/5 others abeted
accused Niranjan in abducting his sister in law vic-
tim Rina Karmaker who wanted to marry the victim.

35. Now let us see whether the facts and cir-
cumstances of the case and evidence on record falls
under the purview of section 4(kha) i.e. (B)/9 of the
Ordinance and whether prosecution has succeeded
in proving the allegation levelled against the
accused appellant Islam.

36. Aforesaid provision of section 4(kha) i.e,
(b)/9 is as follows:

"4, Penalty of kidnapping or abduction of
woman for unlawful or immoral purposes, etc.:

Whoever kidnaps or abducts any woman of
any age... f

(b) with intent that such woman may be
compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she
will be compelled to marry any person against
her will or......

shall be punishable with imprisonment for
life or with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years and shall
also be liable to fine."

"9. Abetment of offences—whoever abets
any offence punishable under this Ordinance
shall if the act abetted is committed in conse-
quence of the abetment, be punishable with the
punishment provided for the offence."

37. To award conviction under section 4(b)/9
of the Ordinance, the prosecution is to prove (1)
whether the victim girl was abducted with intent to
compel her to marry with accused Niranjan and (2)
whether the accused appellant Islam abetted him in
the mater of abduction.

38. Now let us see how far the prosecution has
succeeded in proving the ingredients of the offence
under section 4(b)/9 of the Ordinance.

39. The prosecution case is that Niranjan
Karmaker wanted to marry his sister-in-law Rina
Karmaker but his wife, Shikha Karmaker and victim

            
Rina Karmaker did not agree with the proposal for
which accused Niranjan made conspiracy with
accused Islam, Abdul Hannan Dolan and Kumu to
abduct Rina Karmaker and accordingly, when
Shikha Karmoker, Rina Karmaker, Ratan Chandra
Karmaker and his wife Molina were returning home
after performing ‘puja’ on 25-3-1995 at 9-15 and
when they reached at Munshipara at old Satkhira
road, then the accused person abducted and took the
victim Rina Karmaker to Budhahata of Ashasuni
police station and the victim Rina Karmaker was
recovered from the house of Abdul Gafur of
Budhahata.

40. In the instant case, the victim Rina
Karmaker, her sister Shikha Karmaker, her brother
Ratan Karmaker and his wife Molina in whose pres-
ence the victim Rina Karmaker was alleged to have
been abducted, were not examined.

41. The victim Rina Karmoker made a state-
ment under section 164 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure which corroborated the prosecution case.

42. On the other hand, the victim Rina
Karmaker swearing affidavit before the Sheristader
of Sessions Judge on 27-4-1995 stated that the
accused Niranjan Karmaker is her brother-in-law
(Dulabhai) is an honest man who loves her as his
younger sister. She further stated that the accused
appellant Islam and others have not abducted her;
that she went to Budhahata with her Dulabhai
accused Niranjan voluntarily; that accused appellant
Islam also went there as per the request of Niranjan;
that accused Nirjatan went there to realise arrear
sale proceeds of ornament from a person who mak-
ing conspiracy with police entangled her and others
including the present appellant Islam with this false
case and that IO compelled her giving threat to make
a false statement under section 164 of the Code cor-
roborating the FIR case,

43. In this case, the prosecution have examined
7 PWs, of them PW 1 is the informant and investi-
gating officer who is the engineer of this case. PW
2, Abdul Gafur, who contradicting FIR story stoutly
testified that on enquiry the victim told him that she
went to Budhahata with her brother-in-law named

Niranjon to collect arrcar sale proceeds of ornament
and the accused appellant Islam accompanied them
as per the request of her brother in law. The Victim
further told him that she went to Budhahata volun.
tarily with her brother in law, namely accused
Niranjan, and was not abducted by anybody. FIR
case is that the victim was recovered from the house
of Abdul Gafur who is PW 2 but this witness stout-
ly deposed that she was not recovered from his
house, rather victim stayed in the house of Abdul
Quddus from where she was taken into custody.

44. PW 3 was tendered and the prosecution
declined to cross-examine him.

45. PW 4, Mokammel Hoque, is a man near the
alleged place of occurrence at Munshipara. He stat-
ed in the cross-examination that he does not know
anything about the abduction of the victim Rina
Karmaker and that she lives in India.

46. PW 5, SI Abdul Sukur Mollah deposed that
the victim Rina Karmoker was recovered from the
house of Abdul Gafur but Abdul Gafur as PW 2 stat-
ed that the victim was not recovered from his house.
Here we find a contradiction in the prosecution evi-
dence in respect of the recovery of the victim.

47. PW 6, Mr Golam Mostafa, Magistrate first
class, deposed in his cross-examination that the vic-
tim Rina Karmaker told him that nobody abducted
her.

48. PW 7 constable No.294 Abdul Majid,
deposed that they recovered the victim from the
house of Abdul Gafur but Abdul Gafur as PW 2
deposed that the victim was not recovered from his
house.

49. In the instant case, the charge against
accused appellant Islam is that he abetted accused
Niranjan to abduct the victim Rina Karmaker. It
appears from evidence on record, there is no eye-
witness of the occurrence. Shikha Karmaker, Ratan
Karmaker and Molina in whose presence, the victim,
Rina Karmaker is alleged to have been abducted,
were not examined, In such case the victim is the
best witness who can state the actual facts but here
in this case, the victim has not be examined. It is

            
alleged that the victim was recovered from the
pouse of Abdul Gafur. But Abdul Gafur as PW 2
deposed that the victim was not recovered from his.
pouse. He further deposed that the victim Rina
Karmaker w hile staying in the house of Quddus, she
yo that she voluntarily went with her brother-in-
“ accused Niranjan who went there to collect
srvar sale proceeds of ommament, The victim swear-
ing aflidavit stated that the defaulter person to
yhom they Went to realise arrear sale proceeds of
maments made conspiracy with investigating offi-
‘ho has entangled accused Niranjan in the false

ss¢ of abduction,

50. In the appeal under review, the allegations
st the appellant Islam is that he abetted accused
Niranjan in abducting the victim Rina Karmaker.

51. Firstly, we see what is abetment. Abetment
means an act done either prior to or at the time of
commencement of the offence. Under section 107 of
the Penal Code a man is said to abet a thing if he
incites a man or conspires with others or aids the
doing of the mischief. The mere giving of aid will
not make an act of abetment of offence. Mere pres-
ence without proof of any act or common intention
will not cause an offence of abetment.

52. In the instant case there is no evidence of
proof of conspiracy. There is no specific allegation
that this accused person were present at the time of
alleged abduction. The persons in whose presence
the alleged abduction had occurred were not exam-
ined, rather the victim told PW 2 and PW 4 that the
appellant Islam has not abducted her. Mere presence
without proof of any act will not come under an
offence of abetment.

53. As a general rule, the charge of abetment
against abettor fails if the substantive offence is not
€stablished against.the principal accused. If the prin-
cipal offence is not made out, the charge of abetment
against the abetment must fail.

54. We find support of the above view in the
decisions reported in PLD 1960 Dhaka 723 and in
the decision reported in 22 CrLJ 1135.

55. In the instant case, the charge against the

principal accused Niranjan has not been proved and
as such, the charge of abetment against the accused
appellant Ranimul Islam does not stand.

56. In the case of abduction, conspiracy before
abduction is a pertinent question. It is alleged that
accused Niranjan made conspiracy with the accused
appellant Ranimul Islam and others to abduct the
victim, But there is nothing on record to show that
the accused appellant Ranimul Islam was a partner
in any conspiracy which resulted in the abduction of
the victim Rina Karmaker. Therefore, it could not be
said in the facts and circumstances of the case that
the prosecution had been able to prove the charge
levelled against the accused appellant Islam. To sus-
tain a charge of abetment it is necessary that there
must exist some evidence of an overt act so as to
suggest a pre-concert or to suggest the existence of
a conspiracy, committed out of a common design to
commit a particular offence, committed in conse-
quence the instigation or in the aid of offence. There
is no allegation in this case as to forcible abduction
for the purpose of marriage and, in fact, the matter
of abduction has not been proved and no such mar-
riage took place. The principle as spelt out above is
based on the case of Ananda vs State reported in 4/

DLR 533.

57. The place, time and manner of occurrence
are very important factors in a criminal case. It is
alleged in the FIR that the victim Rina Karmaker
was abducted in presence of her sister Shikha
Karmaker, her brother Ratan Chandra Karmaker anid
this wife Malina but they were not examined. Even
the victim herself was not examined. Rather the vic-
tim swearing affidavit stated that she was not
abducted and she went to Budhahata with her broth-
er in law voluntarily.

58. It is alleged in the FIR that the victim Rina
Karmaker was recovered from the house of Abdul
Gafur but Abdul Gafur as PW 2 deposed that the
victim was no* recovered from his house. PW 2,
Abdul Gafur, and PW 6, Golam Mostafa, testified
that the victim told them that she was not abducted,
rather she told them that she went to Budhahata with
her brother-in-law voluntarily. Thus we find serious
contradictions between FIR case and evidence on


            
record in respect of the time, place and manner of
occurrence which creates serious doubt in the pros-
ecution case which leads us to hold that the alleged
occurrence did not at all take place on the day, time,
place and in the manner as alleged. If the time, place
and manner of occurrence are not proved, the
accused appellant cannot be convicted. We find sup-
port of the above view in the case of Abdur Rashid
vs State 8 BLC 513.

59. A careful scrutiny of the evidence of pros-
ecution witnesses indicates that the evidence of
prosecution witnesses are discrepant and inconsis-
tent which are unworthy of credit. It is well settled
that discrepancies of serious nature will strike at the
root of the prosecution case. The discrepancies in
the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses in this
case are so fatal which render the prosecution case
doubtful.

60. Our above gets support in the case of State
vs Sabir Mia 1] BLT 294 = 8 BLC 235.

61. It is true that the burden of proving a plea
of alibi or any other plea specifically set up by an
accused for absolving him of criminal liability lies
on him, But this burden is somewhat lighter than
that of the prosecution. The accused could be con-
sidered to have discharged his burden if he succeeds
in creating a reasonable belief in the existence of cir-
cumstance that would absolve him of criminal lia-
bility, but the prosecution is to discharge its burden
by establishing the guilt of the accused. An
accused's burden is lighter because the Court is to
consider his plea only after and not before, the pros-
ecution leads its evidence for sustaining conviction.
In the instant case, the very vital point of abduction
of the victim has not been proved, rather it appears
from the testimonies of the prosecution witnesses
that the victim Rina Karmaker went to Budhahata
with her brother-in-law accused Niranjan voluntari-
ly ‘and nobody abducted her and none abetted
accused Niranjan in the matter of alleged abduction,
Thus the prosecution witnesses have proved the
defence plea which has absolved accused appellant
Islam of criminal liability that lies on him and the
appellant cannot be saddled with any onus to prove
his innocence.

62. We receive support of the above view in
the case of Nannu Gazi vs Awlad Hossain 43 Dip
(AD) 63 and in the case of Younus vs State 8 BLT
245.

63. The learned trial Court convicted the
accused appellant Islam on the basis of statement of
the victim Rina Karmaker treating the same as evi-
dence. In this case, the victim was not examined as
witness, Now the question whether her statement
under section 164 can be used as evidence.

64. It is well settled that the statement made by
a witness under section 164 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is not a substantive piece of evidence
because such statement was not taken by oath nor
was the deponent cross-examined by the defence.
Such statement can be used only to corroborate the
statement of the witness or to contradict him. It can
be used to test the veracity in the evidence of the
witnesses but cannot be used to substantiate the
facts stated therein. The statement cannot be used
for filling up the lacunac or for strengthening the
prosecution evidence which is otherwise weak and
no conviction can be based on such statement.

65. In the instant case, the conviction awarded
on the appellant Islam on such statement is not legal.
We find support of the above view in the case of
Asaddar Ali vs State reported in 1989 BLD 187, in
the case of Anis Ali Master vs State reported in 1985
BLD 318 and in the case of Taijuddin Pramanik vs
State reported in 198] BLD 433.

66. Shikha Rani Karmaker, elder sister of the
victim Rani Karmaker, her brother Ratan Karmaker
and his wife Molina alleged to have been present at
the time of alleged abduction were not examined by
the prosecution. Moreover, the victim who _ is the
best witness in this case, has also not been examined
in this case. Non production of such vital witnesses
and the persons who were around place of occur-
rence gives rise to an adverse presumption about the
genuineness of the prosecution case.

67. Withholding of material witnesses to
unfold truth raises an adverse presumption about the
prosecution case. The above view finds support

            
from the case Azizur Rahman vs State reported in
1991 BLD 11.

68. The defence case is that, the accused
Niranjan went to Budhahata along with his sister in
Jaw to collect arrear sale proceeds of omaments but
the defaulter persons making conspiracy with police
officer Who is informant as well as investigating
officer has entangled the principal accused Niranjan
and others in this case. In such a situation a police
officer Who is admittedly the informant as well as
the investigating officer is naturally an interested
witness. Where a police officer is the informant as
well as the investigating officer, the evidence of
such witness requires sufficient corroboration. In the
instant case, there is no such corroboration. The
learned trial Court committed illegality in convict-
ing the accused appellant Islam basing on the evi-
dence of such interested witness, We receive support
of the above view in the case of Gaziur Rahman vs
State reported in 199] BLD 11.

69. The learned Advocate for the accused
appellant raises the question that some incriminating
materials were not brought to the notice of accused
appellant at the time of examination under section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure whereby he
was seriously prejudiced. The essence of section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is to enable
the accused to apprehend the allegations and evi-
dence levelled against him for the purpose of afford-
ing him a good defence.

70. The examination of the accused under sec-
tion 342 of the Code is not a mere formality. It is the
fundamental principle of law that the attention of the
accused must be drawn to the evidence on record in
a precise manner.

71. It is found that the examination of the
accused under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure has been done perfunctorily without
bringing the incriminating materials like statement
of the victim under section 164 to the notice of the
accused Ranimul Islam which has seriously preju-
diced the accused and such non-examination of the
accused under section 342 as per law caused gross

miscarriage of justice. In the case of Mirazul Islam
@ Dablu vs State 41 DLR (AD) 157 a sandal which
Was incriminating material sought to implicate the
sed was not drawn to the attention of the

sed at the time of examination under section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and, as such,
the same was left out of consideration. Accordingly,
it was held in that case that incriminating evidence
or circumstance sought to be proved by the prosecu-
tion must be put to the accused during examination
under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, otherwise it would cause miscarriage of

justice causing prejudice to the accused.

72. We receive support of the above view in
the case of State vs Monu Miah 54 DLR (AD) 60.

73. The learned Advocate for the accused
appellant strongly argued that the defence at least is
able to raise some doubt as to the genuineness of the
prosecution case.

74. In the instant case, though the victim Rina
Karmaker was not examined but she swearing an
affidavit stated that the story of abduction was total-
ly false, rather she went to Budhahata with her
brother-in-law accused Niranjan who went there to
collect arrear sale proceeds of ornament but the
defaulter person in connivance with the police offi-
cer like informant entangled the accused Niranjan
and accused appellant in this false case. The victim
told PW 2, Abdul Gafur, the above facts who also
deposed the same in his deposition. The victim also
told to the Magistrate who is PW 6 that she was not
abducted and the Magistrate also deposed the same
in his evidence. This fact and other circumstances
stated above clearly raise doubt as to the genuine-
ness of the prosecution case.

75. The cherished principles or golden thread
of proof beyond reasonable doubt which runs
through the web of our law field should be respect-
ed and should be given due importance at the time
of appreciation of evidence.

76. The age long concept that hundreds of
guilty men might escape but one innocent person
may not suffer.

            
77. It should be borne in mind that if a guilty
person goes unpunished and stands acquitted, jus-
tice delivery system shall break down and public
shall lose confidence in the judicial system which
has also got a public accountability. It is true to say
with Viscount Simons that "miscarriage of justice"
may arise from the acquittal of the guilty on less that
the conviction of the innocent.

78. It is well settled that the Court is to exam-
ine the entire evidence and must distinguish the
chaff from the grain and should not discard the
entire prosecution case merely on the ground that a
part of the story is found to be false. It is the duty
of the Court to disengage the truth from falsehood
instead of taking an easy course of rejecting the evi-
dence in its entirety solely on the ground that the
same is not acceptable in respect of some of the
accused.

79. In the instant case, scanning the entire evi-
dence of PWs it appears to us that there is no eye-
witness of the occurrence of abduction. Only PW 1
SI Ataur Rahman who is informant as well as inves-
tigating officer supports the prosecution case. The
victim herself declares the informant as well as
investigating officer as the engineer of this false
case being biased by the defaulter person to whom
the accused Niranjan went to realise the sale pro-
ceeds of ornaments. The evidence of such partisan
and interested witness cannot be relied upon without
any corroborating evidence of independent witness-
es which also may not inspire the confidence in the
mind of the Court.

80. In this case, there is no corroboration of the
prosecution witnesses by the evidence of independ-
ent witnesses. Moreover, the evidence of PWs are
full of contradictions, inconsistencies and omissions
and there is also a departure from the fact as stated
in the FIR. Moreover, it appears that only the police
witnesses who have not seen the occurrence have
supported the prosecution case. Not a single related
and public witness has supported the prosecution,
rather they supported the defence case,

81. If in a particular case, it appears from evi-
dence and the attending circumstances of the case

that the defence put forward by the accused may be
reasonably true, even though in reality if may not be
true, it reacts upon the entire prosecution case, The
accused becomes entitled to get benefit of doubt not
as a matter of grace but as matter of right.

82. In the instant case the learned trial Cour,
failed to consider the defence case and the evidence
and circumstances lending support to it in their true
perspective. It is well settled that if the defence plea
appears to be reasonably true, although the accused
may not be able to prove it, yet it reacts upon the
entire prosecution case. In this case, the defence has
succeeded in making the defence plea reasonably
possible and the prosecution has failed to prove its
case against the appellant Islam beyond reasonable
doubt.

83. He is certainly entitled to acquittal on ben-
efit of doubt.

84. We find support of the above view in the
case of Ugradev Paik vs State reported in 8 BLT 8.

85. In the light of the above findings, we are
satisfied that the prosecution has failed to establish
the case against the accused appellant Kazi
Ramimul Islam beyond all reasonable doubt and, as
such, the appellant is liable to be acquitted of the
charge levelled against him punishable under sec-
tion 4(kha)/9 of the Ordinance.

86. In the said view of the matter, this appeal
succeeds and the same is allowed accordingly.

87. The conviction and sentence imposed on
the accused appellant Kazi Ramimul Islam by the
trial Court is set aside and the accused appellant is
acquitted of the charge levelled against him under
section 4(Kha)/9 of the Cruelty to Women
(Deterrent Punishment) Ordinance, 1983, The
accused appellant Kazi Ramimul Islam is dis-
charged from his respective bail bond,

Send down the lower Court records along with
a copy of judgment expeditiously,



            
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Civil Appellate Division)

SAN Mominur | Umme Hani Begum and ors
Rahman J Defendant-Appellants
Shahidul Islam J vs
Judgment Ram Gopal Sarker and others
August 13th, 2008. ! ........ Plaintiff-Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (vy of 1908)
Order VI rule 1

The plaintiff is totally silent about any hostile
claim of right as against the defendant Nos. 1-4,
He did not specifically plead any claim of acqui-
sition of title by adverse possession. From the
pleadings of the parties it does not appear that
the plaintiff ever claimed any hostile title against
the said defendant in the examination-in-chief.

axepe (15 & 16)

Transfer of Property Act (IV of 1882)
Section 123

Under section 123 of the Transfer of Pro-
perty Act a deed of gift amongst the Hindus is
compulsorily registerable,

Mahbubey Alam with Md Mozammel Hossain,
Samarendra Nath Biswas and Mahmuda Parvin, Advo-
cates—For the Appellants.

A Baset Majumder with M Sayeed Ahmed and
Maksuda Akhter, Advocates—For the Respondents.

Judgment
Shahidul Islam J: This First Appeal has arisen
out of the judgment and decree dated 12-11-1998
passed by the learned Subordinate Judge, 2nd Court,
Narayanganj, in Title Suit No. 344 of 1994 decree-
ing the suit.

2. The respondent No. 2 as plaintiff instituted
Title Suit No. 344 of 1994 in the Court of Sub-ordi-
nate Judge, 2nd Court, Narayanganj, for declaration
of title by way of acquisition of title by adverse pos-
“First Appeal No. 192 of 1999.
HC 3

session and also for a further declaration that the
registered kabala deed dated 16-4-1969 executed by
the defendant Nos. 5-7 in favour of the predecessor
of the defendant Nos. 1-4 to be inoperative and not
acted upon contending, infer alia, that the suit land
belonged to the defendant Nos. 5-7 who transferred
the same by an unregistered deed of gift in 1964 in
favour of the plaintiff, who got possession in the suit
land through his mother, That deed could not be
registered duc to legal bar imposed by the Govern-
ment for getting registered any deed of transfer
made by any person belonging to the minority com-
munity, but the plaintiff started possessing the suit
land continuously and without any interruption from
any quarter. The plaintiff's further case is that the
CS record, in respect of the suit land was wrongly
prepared in the name of the Government and that
one Ram Mohan and Chini Bashi managed to get
settlement from. the Government and thereafter
transferred in favour of Hari Das and Anath Bandhu.
Chini Bashi transferred in favour of Anath Bandhu
and Anath Bandhu died leaving behind the defen-
dant Nos. 5-7 as his heirs. It was their further
that the defendant Nos. 5-7 were not in Bangladesh
in 1969 and the defendant Nos. 1-4 by creating
forged deed managed to get their names recorded in
the SA and RS record but they were never in pos-
session in the suit land. The plaintiff constructed 18
shops upon the suit land and being in possession
was threatened by the. defendant Nos, 1-4 in
February 1994 with dispossession and, as such, the
suit,

3. The defendant Nos. 1-4 contested the suit
by filing written statement denying the material
statements made in the plaint and specifically deny-
ing the title and possession of the plaintiff in the suit
land. It was their specific case that Government
being the owner of the suit land settled the; same
with Makhan Lal and Chini Bashi who. transferred +
by a registered kabala deed dated 15-4-1969
(Exhibit Ka) in favour of Anath Bandhu and Chini
Bashi. 'Anath Bandhu transferred the suit land in
favour of the predecessor of the defendant Nos. 1-4
by a registered deed dated 16-4-1969 (Exhibit Ka)

            
and that they being in possession the SA and RS
records were prepared in their names and they paid
rent, constructed a factory, shops upon the suit land
and the structures were measuring about 50 feet x 50
feet, 16 feet X 12 feet, and another was measuring 12
feet X 13 feet. The plaintiff was never in possession
and with these averments prayed for dismissal of the
suit.

4. Upon pleadings of the parties the learned
Joint District Judge, 2nd Court, Narayanganj,
framed the following issues:

(i) Is the suit maintainable as it stands

framed?

(ii) Is the suit barred by limitation?

(iii) Is the suit bad for defect of parties?

(iv) Has the plaintiff acquired any title by
adverse possession in the suit land and
whether that is existing too?

(v) Is the registered deed No. 5112 executed
on 15-4-1969 and registered on 16-4-1969
forged, collusive and not binding upon the
plaintiff?

(vi) What other reliefs the plaintiff is entitled

to?

5. The plaintiff examined three witnesses of
whom the plaintiff himself was examined as PW 1.
One Mohammad Ismail was examined as PW 2 and
one Mujibur Rahman was examined as PW 3 and
the unregistered deed of gift dated 16-8-1964
alleged to have been executed by Makhan Lal and
others in favour of plaintiff was marked as Exhibit


6. The defendant examined 4(four) DWs and
their documents were exhibited as Exhibits Ka
series, Kha series, Ga, Gha series, Uma series, Cha,
Chha, Ja, Jna and Neo,

7. Upon consideration of the evidence on
record the learned Subordinate Judge, 2nd Court,
Narayanganj, decreed the suit by the impugned
judgment and decree dated 12-11-1998,

8. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and
decree the defendant has preferred this appeal,

9. Mr Mahbubey Alam, the learned Advocate
for the defendant appellant, took us through 4},
impugned judgment, evidences of both the partigs,
exhibited documents of both the parties, plaint, wri.
ten statement and formulated the following points of
arguments:

(i) the element of acquisition of title by
adverse possession is totally absent in the
evidence led by the plaintiff;

(ii) The plaintiff was a minor of five years at
the time of his alleged unregistered deed
of gift (Exhibit 1). Save and except the
said Exhibit 1, there is no other corrobo-
rating evidence to show that the plaintiff
did ever exercise his act of possession in
the suit;

(iii) The defendants produced their title deeds
along with bia deeds of their vendor, paid
rent and proved their title and possession
by adducing oral and documentary evi-
dence, particularly by paying rent to the
Government;

(iv) the learned Joint District Judge, without
proper discussions of the evidence on
record and being failed to conceive and
consider the principle of acquisition of
title by adverse possession, has decreed
the suit out of misconception of law and
fact and the same is not sustainable in law.

10. Mr A Baset Majumder, the learned
Advocate appearing for the plaintiff-respondent, on
the other hand, supported the judgment and decree
of the trial Court and submitted that since 1964 the
plaintiff being in continuous and uninterrupted pos-
session on the basis of the unregistered deed of gilt
has acquired title by adverse possession and the |
judgment and decree of the Court below are not |
liable to be interfered with.

11. We have heard the learned Advocates of
the respective parties, We have considered their

            
submissions. We have gone through the entire evi-
“arefully and meticulously.

dences on record very

12. From the case as made out in the plaint as
well as in the written statement and from the evi-
dence on record the following issues are framed for
deciding the appeal on merit:

(i) Whether the plaintiff could make out a
case of acquisition of title by adverse pos-
session as per plaint's case?

Whether the evidence of PW 1, PW 2 and
PW 3 are enough to construe adverse pos-
session in the suit land as against the
defendant?

(ii)

Whether the Joint District Judge was jus-
tified in declaring the sale deed of the
defendant dated 16-4-1969 to be not acted
upon?

(iii)

Whether the impugned judgment and
decree are sustainable in law?

(iv)

Let us discuss and decide all the issues together.

13. Adverse possession means hostile posses-
sion which is expressly or impliedly in denial of the
title of the true owner, Such possession must be
actual and exclusive under a clime of right, adequate
in continuity, in publicity and in extent, so as to
show that it is adverse to the true owner. Such pos-
session in denial of the title of the true owner must
be peaceable, open and continuous. It must be open
and hostile enough to be capable of being known to
the party interested before a right can be acquired or
lost by adverse possession, it must have been such
possession by a man without hostile as against the
person with the lawful title.

14. In the instant case there is no such ingredi-
ent available in the plaint of the plaintiff as well as
in the evidence of PW 1-PW 3 to construe adverse
possession. In the instant case, the plaintiff has set
up a case that on the strength of unregistered deed of
gift dated 16-8-1964 he started possessing the suit
land through his mother and thereafter continued his
such possession till filing of the suit. This sort of

possession is termed as lawful possession but not
hostile possession. If any person upon entering into
possession in the suit land on the basis of a deed and
thereafter comes before a Court to get declaration of
title by adverse possession in that case he is required
to give up his claim on the strength of that deed by
which he entered into possession into the suit land
and thereafter he is required to set up his claim of
hostile and notorious possession against the true
owner and further required to prove his said posses-
sion for more than the statutory period of limitation.

15. In the instant case, the plaintiff is totally
silent about any hostile claim of right as against the
defendant Nos. 1-4. The plaintiff did not specifical-
ly plead any claim of his acquisition of title by
adverse possession, It appears that admittedly the
plaintiff was born in the year 1959 meaning thereby
he was aged about 5 years only in 1964. Save and
except his oral evidence that he started possessing
the suit land on the strength of the said unregistered
deed of gift dated 16-4-1964 there is no other cor-
roborative evidence by other two PWs in support of
his possession in the suit land. The PW 2 and PW 3
simply added that the plaintiff was in possession in
the suit land and the defendants did not possess.
Save and except this evidence, there is no other
assertion of aquisition of title by adverse possession
as against the true owner.

16. From the pleadings of the parties it does
not appear that the plaintiff ever claimed any hostile
title against the defendant Nos. 1-4. In the exami-
nation-in-chief, the plaintiff added, that the defen-
dant's predecessor purchased the suit land from the
lessee of the government. Admittedly, the suit land
was recorded in the name of the Government in CS
Khatian and the defendant Nos. 1-4 by producing
Exhibits Ka series could be able to prove that the
Government's lessee had transferred the suit land in
favour of their vendor and by producing Exhibit
Gha series the defendants proved their possession
in the suit land, The DW2 himself being the defen-
dant No, 2 by adducing positive evidence proved
that they established a factory upon the suit land and

            
 that there are other structures measuring about 50
feet x S0 feet, 16 feet x 12 feet, 12 feet x 13 feet they
have in possession, These evidences have not been
denied by the plaintifY nor any reliable evidences
were adduced in the trial by the plaintiff to discard
the defence case. The Exhibit 1 is an unregistered
deed. Admittedly, on 16-8-1964 the plaintiff was a
minor but from the deed itself it shows that he was
described as a major in the said deed. Under section
123 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 a deed of
gift amongst the Hindus is compulsorily register-
able. Moreover, the Exhibit 1 was not proved as per
law by citing the scribe and attesting witness to
prove the said deed as genuine. The vendor of that
deed is the vendor of the defendant's predecessor's
deed. The defendants' deed is a registered deed
dated 16-4-1969 which was acted upon as it appears,
inasmuch as the SA and RS records were prepared
in the name of the defendants and that they paid rent
vide Exhibit Ga and Gha series.

17. Those evidences show that the plaintiff
being not in possession in the suit land filed the suit.

18. In view of the above discussions, we are
constrained to hold that the leaned Joint District
Judge, without discussing and considering the evi-
dence of the parties, has come to his findings most
illegally, arbitrarily and whimsically and those find-
ings are not sustainable in law.

19. In view of our above discussions, we find
merit in the appeal.

20. In the result, appeal stands allowed with
costs. The impugned judgment and decree dated 12-
11-1998 passed by the learned Subordinate Judge,
2nd Court Narayanganj, in Title Suit No. 344 of
1994 decreeing the suit is set aside. The suit stands
dismissed.

Send down the lower Court's record immedi-
ately,



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Special Original Jurisdiction)

Md Imman Ali J | Akbar Khan (Md)...........,,

Md Abu Tariq J -Petitioner
VS

Anti-Corruption Commi.

Judgment ssion and otherS.....e00..0.,,

January 27th, 2010. -Respondents*

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004,
Section 26(1)

Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007
Rules 7(1)(2) & 17(1) ;

A well-established legal principle is that 4
person upon whom power is delegated cannot
delegate the same to another person. In the
instant case the legal provision in Rule 17(1) is
such that the Commission itself could delegate
the power to issue a notice for submission of
wealth statement to anyone of its officers not
below the rank of Deputy Director (DD).

Therefore, the Commission could have directly dele-
gated the power of issuing the notice in Form-5 to the DD.
Anti-Corruption Commission, Integrated District Office
(aafes con arf), Rangamati. Rule 17 further indicates
that any Commissioner.

Section 26(1)

In any event, the Commission may itself
issue the notice or delegate the authority to issue
the notice or may empower any of its
Commissioners to delegate the authority to issue
the notice. The memo dated 9-11-2009 issued by
the Director (Additional charge), ACC Divisional
Office, Chittagong specifically directed the DD to
issue the notice under his (the DD's) signature
and to serve the same. This chain of delegation is
not contemplated by the law. A Director of the
Divisional Office does not have the power of del-

egation. 21)



            
Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V 0f 2004)
Section 26(c)

The matter is at the very initial stage and no
proceedings are yet drawn up against the peti-
tioner. If may be legitimately argued that the
petitioner did not suffer any prejudice since the
notice was issued by a DD who under the law has
the rank and status to be authorised to issue the
notice. The point raised by the petitioner is high-
jy technical and should not be allowed to obstruct
the course of justice.

Interpretation of Statutes
Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 26(1)

The strict interpretation of the law, is that
the power to delegate lies with the ACC or any
Commissioner empowered by the ACC. There is
nothing to prevent the ACC even now to autho-
rise the DD of the Anti-Corruption Commission,
Integrated District Office (Tafes cam srr),
Rangamati to issue the notice upon the petition-
er. The Commission may directly authorise any
DD of the Commission. Equally, the ACC could
empower any of its Commissioners and that
Commissioner so empowered could delegate his
authority upon anyone not below the rank of DD
of Anti-Corruption Commission to issue the
notice and there is no legal bar to do so even now
by issuing a fresh authority in accordance with
law. The delegatee, namely the DD, if so autho-
rised by the proper authority, may issue a fresh
notice. But from the facts and circumstances of
the instant case, we do not find any authority
given to the Director of the Divisional Office,
Chittagong to delegate his authority to the DD to
issue the impugned notice. It is a highly techni-
cal legal defect which can be cured.

Bangladesh vs Iqbal Hasan Mahmood 60 DLR (AD)
147; Anti-Corruption Commission vs Sheikh Hasina

Wazed, 60 DLR (AD) 172 and Habibur Rahman Molla vs
State 61 DLR 1 ref.

Rafique-ul Hug, Senior Advocate with Md Mizanul
Hog Chowdhury, Md Hasan Rajib Prodhan and Hasan
Mohammed Reyad, Advocates—For the Petitioner.

Md Khurshid Alam) Khan, Advocate—For

Respondent No.3.

Judgment

Md Immon Ali J : A notice dated 30-12-2009
was issued by the Deputy Director, Anti-Corruption
Commission, Integrated District Office (aft CAT
‘erftem), Rangamati directing the petitioner to sub-
mit his wealth statement addressed to the Secretary.
Anti-Corruption Commission within seven days of
that notice. Upon an application by the petitioner
under Article 102 of the Constitution a Rule Nisi
was issued calling upon the respondents to show
cause as to why the order passed by the respondent
No.2 vide Memo No. Wa/Atesi/arAl/ ded dated
30-12-2009 under section 26(1) of the Anti-Corrup-
tion Commission Act, 2004 directing the petitioner
to submit statements regarding the Moveable and
Immoveable Property, liabilities, source of income
of the petitioner and his dependents (Annexure-D)
should not be declared to have been passed without
lawful authority and is of no legal effect.

2. The facts of the case relevant for disposal
of this Rule, in brief, are that the petitioner was the
Kanango of Land Acquisition Department of the
Deputy Commissioner Office, Chittagong and is
presently on LPR. He was issued with a notice under
section 26(1) of the Anti-Corruption Commission
Act, 2004 (ACC Act) directing him to submit his
wealth statement addressed to the Secretary of the
Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC). The notice
was signed by the Deputy Director, Anti-Corruption
Commission, Integrated District Office (TAPES CT

ardent), Rangamati.

3. The writ petition mentions a number of
grounds for declaring the notice to have been passed
without lawful authority and is of no legal effect,


            
including the fact that the period of 30 days pre-
scribed for concluding the inquiries by the ACC, as
mandated by sub-rules 1, 2 and 5 of Rule 7 of the
Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007 (ACC
Rules), were not met, It was argued, therefore, that
the impugned notice was without jurisdiction. It is
further contended that a copy of the inquiry report
was not attached with the notice and hence the
notice is in violation of principles of natural justice.

4. In a supplementary affidavit filed by the
petitioner it is further contended that the notice was
issued by the Deputy Director, Anti-Corruption
Commission, Integrated District Office (AafaS Cor
=r), Rangamati and not by the Commission
itself as required by section 26 of the ACC Act.

5. The respondent No.3, Chairman, Anti-
Corruption Commission appeared by filing an affi-
davit-in-opposition contending therein that the mat-
ter of inquiry before the decision to issue the notice
is an administrative matter and is not justiciable and
that the notice issued by the Deputy Director (DD)
was in accordance with law, the power having been
delegated to him under the ACC Act and Rules.

6. In reply, the petitioner filed an affidavit
contending that the arguments raised in the affi-
davit-in-opposition are misconceived.

7. Mr Rafique-ul Hug, learned Advocate
appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submitted
mainly on one point, namely the jurisdiction of the
Deputy Director of the Anti-Corruption Commis-
sion, Integrated District Office (few cern srt),
Rangamati to issue the notice upon the petitioner for
submission of his wealth statement, Mr Huq,
referred to section 26 of the ACC Act, 2004 and sub-
mitted that the authority is given by the law to the
Commission to issue any notice under section 26(1)
of the ACC Act. By reference to section 18, he sub-
mits that there is a power of delegation by the Com-
mission to any officer of the Commission and Rule
17(1) provides for the power of issuing notice to be
delegated to any officer not belong the rank of
Deputy Director, He submits however that in the
instant case there is no evidence to show that the

Commission delegated its power to the DD con.
cerned. He submits, therefore, that the notice issueq
by a person who was not duly authorised by th.
ACC is without jurisdiction and is of no legal effect,

8. Mr Md Khurshid Alam Khan, learneg
Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3,
submits that the power of delegation is given in sec.
tion 18 of the ACC Act as well as Rule 17(1) of the
ACC Rules, 2007. He submits that the essential mat-
ter to be looked at is, whether the person who issued
the notice has the capacity under the law to issue
such notice and whether the Commission has dele-
gated the power in accordance with law. He points
out that the Commission or any Commissioner
authorised by the Commission may delegate the
power to any officer of the ACC not below the rank
of DD. By reference to the office orders and corres-
pondence, some of which are reproduced in the
affidavit-in-apposition, the learned Advocate sub-
mits that the Commission duly authorised the
Director of the Divisional Office of the ACC,
Chittagong and the Director then authorised the DD
to issue the notice under his name and signature. He
submits that there has been no illegality in such del-
egation of power and that clearly under Rule 17(1)
the signatory to the notice being a DD, it was well
within his power and authority to issue such notice.

9. With regard to the matter of delay in con-
cluding the inquiry and not submitting a copy of the
report with the notice, Mr Khurshid Alam Khan,
learned Advocate for respondent No.3, submits that
these are not requirements of law and that the
inquiries which take place are all matters within the
administrative power of the ACC and are not justi-
ciable as was found in the case of Government of
Bangladesh vs Iqbal Hasan Mahmood, 60 DLR
(AD) 147. He further asserts that there is no obliga-
tion or requirement under the law to furnish the peti-
tioner with a copy of the inquiry report as was held
in the case of Anti-Corruption Commission vs
Sheikh Hasina Wazed, 60 DLR (AD) 172.

10. We have considered the submissions of the
learned Advocate, perused the petition and the affivates

            
submitted by both the petitioner and the
respondent No.3,

11. At the outset we may dispose of the two
matters raised in the petition with regard to the delay
jn concluding the inquiry by the ACC and failure of
the ACC to furnish the petitioner with a copy of the
inquiry report. The matter of furnishing the petition-
er with an inquiry report can be disposed of by sim-

je reference to the decision in the case of Anti-
Coruption Commission vs Sheikh Hasina Wazed,
60 DLR (AD) 172, where it was held as follows :

"Moreover, the Commission was not
required to disclose any specific material or
investigation report for issuing an order asking
for statement of assets and the satisfaction is
that of the Commission and none else..."

12. With regard to the delay in concluding the
inquiry, We are inclined to accept the submissions of
the leamed Advocate for the respondent No.3 that
such matters are within the domain of administrative
procedure of the ACC and are not justiciable. We
may refer to the decision in the case of Habibur
Rahman Molla vs State, 61 DLR 1, where it was
observed as follows :

Ae Moreover, before recording a case
under section 154 of the Code any activities
undertaken by the Anti-Corruption Commission
is to be considered an “administrative act"
which cannot be brought for "judicial scrutiny"
under section 561A of the Code, inasmuch as
the words "any Court" employed in section
561A must be understood to mean a "criminal

13. We note that, although the Appellate Divi-
sion has granted leave with regard to the decision in
the case of Habibur Rahman Molla mentioned
above, the leave was granted only with respect to an
additional ground relating to the possibility of
including in the case allegations of criminal acts
which took place before the ACC came into being
and that matter is pending before the Appellate
Division as Criminal Appeal No. 5 of 2009.

14. However, we may refer to Hahibur
Rahman Molla and draw the analogy that any pre-
liminary activity prior to issuance of the notice is
purely an administrative matter which cannot be
agitated before any Court. Morcover, the case of
Anti-Corruption Commission vs Sheikh Hasina
Wazed endorses the view that it is the satisfaction of
the Commission which is the essential matter to be
looked into, In the instant case, we find from the
office file produced before us and also partly repro-
duced in the affidavit-in-opposition that the ACC
was satisfied upon inquiry and authorised its officer
to issue a notice upon the petitioner under section
26(1).

15. With regard to the authority of the Deputy
Director, Anti-Corruption Commission, Integrated
District Office (ARES CoAT sTfFT), Rangamati to
issue the impugned notice, we may refer to the rele-
vant provision of law.

Section 26(1) of the ACC Act provides as follows :


16. This provision of law, therefore, empowers
the Commission to issue a notice for submission of
statement. Section 18 of the ACC Act provides as
follows :

17. It, therefore, appears that the Commission
may delegate its power to any Commissioner or any

            
other officer of the Commission, Rule 17(1) of the
ACC Rules, 2007 provides as follows :

18. From the aforesaid Rule it appears that the
Commission or any Commissioner empowered by
the Commission may approve anyone not below the
rank of DD to issue a notice in Form-5 calling for
submission of a wealth statement.

19. In the instant case, we find that by memo
No. W4#/80/on/para/fassqseors dated 27-10-
2009 one Sharmin Ferdoushi, Deputy Director
(ResqeeeAB-y) on behalf of the ACC directed the
Director of ACC, Divisional Office, Chittagong to
issue a notice in Form-5 calling for the wealth state-
ment of Md Akbar Khan (the petitioner) and to noti-
fy the Head Office. The said memo further directed
the Director to receive from the petitioner the wealth
statement which shall be addressed to the Secretary
of the ACC. It is also mentioned in that memo that
the Director is to take steps for service of the notice
Gere am fea onion wits Gry areca ry
‘wyral4 +a Zr), A subsequent correspondence was
sent by the Director (Additional charge), ACC
Divisional Office, Chittagong dated 9-11-2009
addressed to Deputy Director, Anti-Corruption
Commission, Integrated District Office (fS cer
=f), Rangamati (respondent No. 2) directing the
recipient to issue a notice under his name (name of
the Deputy Director) and to take steps for service of

the same. Accordingly, the DD issued the impugned
notice,

20. ‘There is a well established legal Principle
that a person upon whom power is delegated cannot
delegate that power to another person. In the instant,
case the legal provision in Rule 17(1) is such that the
Commission itself could delegate the power to issue
a notice for submission of wealth statement to any.
one of its officers not below the rank of Dp,
Therefore, the Commission could have directly de}.
egated the power of issuing the notice in Form-5 to
the DD. Anti-Corruption Commission, Integrated
District Office (AAS Cet sri), Rangamati,
Rule 17 further indicates that any Commissioner,
who is empowered by the Commission, also has the
same power of delegating the authority to issue the
notice for submission of wealth statement upon any-
one of its officers above the rank of DD. In the
instant case, the Commission, as it appears from the
memo dated 27-10-2009 mentioned above, delegat-
ed the power of issuing the notice to the Director of
the Divisional Office in Chittagong, specifically
mentioning that the wealth statement addressed to
the Secretary was to be deposited with him (the
Director of the Divisional Office). We note also that
the memo authorises the Director to cause the sery-
ice of the notice. We do not find any indication in
section 18 or Rule 17(1) that the Director of the
Divisional Office could be empowered by the
Commission to delegate his authority of issuing the
notice.

21. In any event, it is our view that the Com-
mission may itself issue the notice or may itself del-
egate the authority to issue the notice or may
empower any of its Commissioners to delegate the
authority to issue the said notice. The memo dated
9-11-2009 issued by the Director (Additional
charge), ACC Divisional Office, Chittagong specit-
ically directed the DD to issue the notice under his
(the DD's) signature and to serve the same. This
chain of delegation is not contemplated by the law.
A Director of the Divisional Office does not have
the power of delegation under the law.

22. The learned Advocate for the respondent
No. 3 submitted that the matter is in the very prime
stage and no proceeding has yet started against the

            
petitioner and no illegality has been committed by
the DD in issuing the impugned notice since any DD
could have been authorised by the Commission to
issue the notice under Rule 17(1) of the ACC Rules.
He further points out that in this case the DD con-
cemed was duly authorised by the Director of the
Divisional Office, who had the authority from the
Head Office of the ACC, He also points out that the
petitioner has not suffered any prejudice.

23. We agree that the matter is at the very ini-
tial stage and no proceedings are yet drawn up
against the petitioner. It may be legitimately argued
that the petitioner did not suffer any prejudice since
the notice was issued by a DD who under the law
has the rank and status to be authorised to issue the
notice. The point raised by the petitioner is highly
technical and should not be allowed to obstruct the
course of justice.

24. However, the strict interpretation of the

law, in our view, is that the power to delegate lies
with the ACC or any Commissioner empowered by
the ACC. There is nothing to prevent the ACC even
now to authorise the DD of the Anti-Corruption
Commission, Integrated District Office CTafee CAT
=F), Rangamati to issue the notice upon the peti-
tioner. The Commission may directly authorise any
DD of the Commission. Equally, the ACC could
empower any of its Commissioners and that, Com-
missioner so empowered could delegate his authori-
ty upon anyone not below the rank of DD of Anti-
Corruption Commission to issue the notice and there
is no legal bar to do so even now by issuing a fresh
authority in accordance with law. The delegatee,
namely the DD, if so authorised by the proper
authority, may issue a fresh notice. But from the
facts and circumstances of the instant case, we do
not find any authority given to the Director of the
Divisional Office, Chittagong to delegate his author-
ity to the DD to issue the impugned notice, It is a
highly technical legal defect which can be cured.

25. In view of ‘the above, we find that the
impugned notice issued by the DD of the Anti-
Corruption Commission, Integrated District Office
Crifes corn writen), Rangamati is not in accor-
dance with law and is of no legal effect.

26. With the above observations and findings,
the Rule is made absolute without any order as to
costs.

Let a copy of this judgment be communicated
to the Chairman of the ACC.


HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Civil Appellate Jurisdiction)
Siddiqur Rahman | Saroj Kumar Sarker and oth-
Miah J BES. cnessonerenerts Petitioners
Md Rezaul Haque J vs
Judgment Monoj ‘Kumar Sarker.........
February 5th, 2007. Opposite Party*

Code of Civil Procedure (Vv of 1908)
Section 24
Transfer of appeal—It appears that all the
grounds of withdrawing of the appeal from the
Court of District Judge have been mitigated and
there is no apprehension of injustice if the appeal
is withdrawn and transferred to this Court,
rather such transfer will do justice to the parties.
dinner gta Ramin DAME FA EN (20)

Mahbubey Alam with Samarendra Nath Biswas.

Advocates—For the Petitioners.

None Appears—For the Opposite Party:

Judgment

Siddiqur Rahman Miah J: This application
under section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure
originates out of First Appeal No. 15.0f 1988 which
also arises from Partition Suit No. 64 of 1986 before

*Civil Miscellaneous Case No. 8 of 2004.

            
this Court and also originates from First Appeal No.
15 of 1988 which also arises out of Title Suit No, 96
of 1984 in the Court of Munsif, Manikgonj.

2. The Additional Deputy Commissioner
(Rev) Manikgonj on behalf of Monoj Kumar Sarker
alias Moinal Sarker filed Partition Suit No. 64 of
1986 in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, First
Court, Manikgonj claiming a share therein stating
that Monoj Kumar Sarker, a co-sharer in the suit
land, has left for India and his share has become
enemy property and the property requires partition,

3. Motish Chandra Sarker and Saroj Kumar
Sarker, brothers of Monoj Kumar Sarker, on the
other hand, filed Title Suit No. 96 of 1984 in the
Court of the Munsif, Manikgonj in respect of the
selfsame property. Subsequently the suit was trans-
ferred to the Court of Subordinate Judge,
Manikgonj, for analogous hearing with the aforesaid
Partition Suit No, 64 of 1986 and the same was
renumbered as Title Suit No. 138 of 1985. In that
suit plaintiff claimed that their co-sharer, Monoj
Kumar Sarker, left for India in the year 1952 and
died their in the year 1954 and on his death they
have inherited his share.

4. The aforesaid two suits were heard analo-
gously and by the judgment and decree dated 31-8-
1987, the learned Subordinate Judge dismissed the
Suit No. 138 of 1985 filed by the petitioner Saroj
Kumar Sarker and others and decreed Partition Suit
No. 64 of 1986 filed by the Government on behalf
of Monoj Kumar Sarker.

5. Against the judgment and decree in Suit
No. 64 of 1986, the’ defendants of the said suit i.e.
the petitioners, have filed an appeal being Title
Appeal No. 15 of 1988 before this Court and same
is pending for hearing.

6. Against the judgment and decree passed in
Title Suit No. 138 of 1985, the plaintiff of the said
suit i.e. the petitioners, filed an appeal being Title
Appeal No. 197 of 1987 in the Court of the learned
District Judge, Manikgonj and same is also pending
for hearing.

7. The appellants of First Appeal No. 15 of
1988 as petitioners filed an application under sec.
tion 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure for with.
drawing the Title Appeal No. 197 of 1985 pending
in the Court of District Judge, Manikgonj and for
transferring the same to this Court for analogous
hearing with First Appeal No. 15 of 1988.

8. No one appears on behalf of the opposite
parties.

9. Mr Mahbubey Alam, the learned Advocate
for the petitioners, submits that Title Suit No. 64 of
1986 and Title Suit No. 138 of 1985 having beep
heard and disposed of by the learned Subordinate
Judge, Manikgonj by a single judgment and, a;
such, the First Appeal No. 15 of 1988 arising out of
Title Suit No. 64 of 1986 pending before this Coun
and Title Appeal No. 197 of 1987 arising out of
Title Suit No. 138 of 1985 now pending before the
learned District Judge, Manikgonj require to be
heard analogously and for that purpose it is neces-
sary for ends of justice to transfer Title Appeal No,
197 of 1987 from the Court of District Judge,
Manikgonj to this Court, so that matter can be heard
analogously with First Appeal No. 15 of 1988 pend-
ing before this Court. He further submits that if the
aforesaid two appeals are heard separately, there
may be the possibility of contradictory judgments.

10. In support of his contention he cited the
decision in the case of Rosamma Joseph vs PC
Sabastian reported in AJR 1996 Kerala 113.

11. The point for determination is, whether
Title Appeal No. 197 of 1987 can be withdrawn
from the Court of learned District Judge, Manikgonj
for transferring the same to this Court for analogous
hearing with First Appeal No. 15 of 1988.

12. Now let us see the provision of law in
respect of transfer and withdrawal of Suit and
appeal which is envisaged in section 24 of the Code
of Civil Procedure:

"24. (1) On the application of any of the
parties and after notice to the parties and after
hearing such of them as desire to be heard, or of


            
its own motion without such notice, the High 14, The High Court Division has power to
Court Division or the District Court may at any — transfer an appeal to itself svo mor though appeal
stage. lies to the District Court. High Court can under sec-

‘ ‘ tion 2. sfe its file a suit to a District Court.
(@) transfer any suit, appeal or other pro- ion 24 transfer from its file a suit to a District Court

ceeding pending before it for trial or disposal to 15, We receive support of the above view in
any Court subordinate to it and competent to try the case of Ayesha vs Daleep A 1961 Raj 186 and in
or dispose of the same, or the case of Geyer vs GA 1949 L 34.

(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been
transferred or withdrawn under sub-section (1),
the Court which thereafter tries such suit may,
subject to any special directions in the case of
any order of transfer, either retry it or proceed
from the point at which it was transferred or
withdrawn.

(4) The Court trying any suit transferred or
withdrawn under this section from a Court of
Small Causes shall, for the purpose of such suit,
be deemed to be a Court of Small Causes."

(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other pro-
ceeding pending in any Court subordinate to it,
and

16. Where two suits arise from common ques-
tions of law and both suits should be tried at same
place and by same Judge and where properties and
(i) try or dispose of the same; or subject matter of two suits are one and same and the
common question of law and facts are also same, but

ii) transfer the i i i
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to there is no bar to try these sorts of cases analogously.

any Court subordinate to it and competent to try
or dispose of the same; 17. Before deciding the question involved in
this case, it is necessary to find out what are the
guidelines for exercise of power of transfer and
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal _ withdrawal of the suit under section 24 of the Code
to the Court from which it was withdrawn, of Civil Procedure. Section 24 of the Code of Civil
Procedure confers general power to transfer and
withdraw the suits and proceedings by the High
Court and the District Court. The language of sec-
tion 24 is very wide and there is no restriction in the
way of exercising this power by the High Court on
suitable cases. It can be exercised by the Court
cither on the application of any party or of its own
motion and at any stage of the suit. It may well be
(3) For the purpose of this section, Courts discerned that the provisions contained in section 15
of Additional and Assistant Judges shall be of the Code of Civil Procedure will not stand in the
deemed to be subordinate to the District Court. way of exercising the power under section 24.
Section 15 of the Code only requires institution of
the suit in the Court of the lowest grade competent
to try it. It does not preclude transfer of a suit so
instituted to a Court of superior grade. In this case
the appeal which is pending before the District
13. This section confers a general power to Judge, Manikgonj, is sought to be tried by the High
transfer, withdraw and retransfer suits, appeals or Court Division, Where there are two suits which
other proceedings at any stage on the application of raise certain common question of fact and law, hav-
a party. The power of the High Court and District ing a substantial bearing on the decision of each of
Judge are concurrent. The Court may also exercise _ the cases, it is obviously desirable that they should
the power suo motu. The section empowers the be tried at the same place and by the same Judge.
Court to transfer a suit to itself and to retransfer it to The involvement of common question of law and
the Court where it was filed after passing an interim fact is not the only ground authorising the transfer of
order. suits under section 24 of the Code of Civil

or




            
Procedure. It is only illustrative and not exhaustive.
This is paramountly a matter involving the satisfac-
tion of the Court which exercises the power. What
we want to say is that when certain common ques-
tions of facts having a substantial bearing on the
decision of both the cases, they should be tried
together. Even if the facts of the suits sought to be
tried together are intertwined with cause of action in
each suit, the transfer of suit may not be refused pro-
vided the parties and subject matter of the suits are
one and the same. When the Court sees that facts
intertwined with the different causes of action are
separated and suits tried independently would result
in conflicting decisions, it can allow the transfer and
joint trial.

18. In the instant case, the litigating parties as
analysed hereinbefore in both the suits are one and
the same and the subject matter involved in both the
suits are common having a substantial bearing on
the decisions of both the cases and if these two
appeals are not tried analogously there is every pos-
sibility of conflicting decisions,

19. In this case the petitioner has filed the
application for transfer of the appeal, the respondent
has not opposed it by filing any counter-affidavit,
and there is no objection at all which presumed that

there is no chance of being prejudiced by the other
side.

20. In the instant case not only the parties are
same or question of law is same both the suits were
tried analogously by the learned Subordinate Judge,
Manikgonj. Thus it appears to us that all the grounds
of withdrawing of the appeal from the Court of
District Judge have been mitigated and there is no
apprehension of injustice if the appeal is withdrawn
and transferred to this Court, rather such transfer

will do justice to the parties. The High Court in such’

circumstances has unfettered power under section
24(1)(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure with regard
to the transfer and withdrawal of the appeal.

21. In the light of the above discussion, we are
of the view that the application under section 24
merits consideration.

22, In the result, the Rule is made absolute
without any order as to costs and the Title Appeal
No. 197 of 1987 pending in the Court of the Distrig,
Judge, Manikgonj is withdrawn and transferred to
this Court for hearing along with the First Appeaj
No. 15 of 1988 analogously.

Communicate.



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Criminal Miscellaneous Jurisdiction)

AKM Asaduzzaman J| Sheikh Mashuk Rahman...
Md Rezaul Hasan J ] wsseeeeeee Petitioner

Judgment
August 16th 2009.

Code of Criminal Procedure (Vv of 1898)
Section 561A
Negotiable Instruments Act (XXVI of 1881)
Section 138

Whether the notice as required to be served
under section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act
is essentially a question of fact to be proved by
adducing evidence at the time of trial, inasmuch
as there is specific assertion in the complaint peti-
tion that such a notice was, served,

Negotiable Instruments Act (XxV1 of 1881)
Sections 138, 138A & 140

Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Sections 420/406

A prosecution launched under section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act is different from

one launched under sections 420/406 of the Penal

*Criminal Miscellaneous No.1554 of 2008.

            
Code, Not only the ingredients are different
petween the offences punishable under these two
statutes, rather the liability under section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act, as imposed for
dishonour of cheque, is a strict liability. ....... (10)

Interpretation of Statute
Negotiable Instruments Act (xxV1 of 1881)
section 138

Intention on the part of the legislators to give
any benefit of doubt to an individual accused in a
case Under section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, rather, intention of the legisla-
tors Appears to be to secure beneficial interest of
the drawee of a cheque, as is apparent from a
mere perusal of this section. This intention of the
legislators have been made further clear by
incorporating section 138A in the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881, prescribing provision for
depositing not less than 50% of the amount of the
dishonoured cheque is a pre-condition for filing
appeal against any order or sentence under sub-
section (1) of section 138,

Code of Criminal Procedure (v of 1898)
Section 561A

Mere presence of an arbitration clause in the
agreement does bar launching of a criminal case,
if the complaint discloses a prima facie case as
evident from the case reported in 2002 SCC (Cri)
129, SW Palanitkar vs State of Bihar. (12)

Md Abul Hossain, Advocate—For the Petitioner.

MA Muntakim, Advocate—For the Opposite Parties.

Judgment
Md Rezaul Hasan J: On an application under
section 561(A) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
this Rule was issued calling upon the opposite party
to show cause as to why the proceedings of Metro
Sessions Case No.2155 of 2006 arising out of CR

Case No.2612 of 2005 under section 13% of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 188) now ding
before the court of Metro, Assistant Sessions Ju¢
Sth Court, Dhaka should not be quashed.

2. The case started upon a petition of com-
plaint on the facts, shortly as follows :

The petitioner started business on behalf of his
firm Angel Computers Limited with the com-
plainant-company for selling computer accessories
imported by the complainant company; that a bilat-
eral agreement was executed on 12-5-05 between
the accused petitioner and complainant-company in
presence of the witnesses wherein it was incorporat-
ed that the accused will be given credit facilities on
sales and he will place cheques for the same to be
encashed within the time limit; that during transac-
tions, on request of the accused and as per his
demand, the complainant company delivered to the
accused computer accessories for an amount of Taka
30,04,225; that as per the terms and conditions of
the said agreement dated 12-5-05 if the accused's
cheques were dishonoured, the accused is to pay an
interest @ 12% on the total receivable amount; the
accused out of Taka 30,04,225 issued cheques in
favour of complainant for an amount of Taka
26,95,500 and paid in cash Taka 2,17,000 out of rest
of amount of Taka 3,08,275 on 11-7-05; that the
total number of cheques issued by the accused is 32
(thirty-two), drawn on South East Bank Limited,
New Elephant Road Branch, Dhaka, against his cur-
rent account No.11100003175; that the cheque No.
8235663 dated 18-7-05 and the cheque No.8235663
dated 1-4-05 were placed for encashment on 2-4-05,
but the same were dishonoured with the remarks
‘Insufficient Fund’ and the said cheques was placed
for encashment on 3-8-05, but all the cheques were
dishonoured by the concerned Branch, with the
remark ‘Insufficient fund’. That an undertaking was
signed by the accused on 12-7-05 in w i
respect of payment of outstanding dues; That the
complainant served legal notice on 15-8-05 upon the
accused by registered post but he did not pay the
money. Hence this case filed under sections 138 and
140 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.


            
3. That the case was eventually transferred to
the Court of the learned Metropolitan Sessions
Judge, Dhaka and registered as Metro, Sessions
Case No. 2155 of 2006, who has taken cognizance
of the case, and by an order dated 20-7-06, subse-
quently transferred the case to the court of the
learned Metro Assistant Sessions Judge, Sth Court,
Dhaka for disposal.

4. That as stated in paragraph No.4 of the
petition, filed under section 561A, the accused peti-
tioner surrendered voluntarily before the court of the
learned Metro. Assistant Sessions Judge, Sth Court,
Dhaka, where it was re-numbered as Metro.
Sessions Case No. 2561 of 2006 and the learned
Metro. Assistant Sessions Judge granted bail to the
petitioner on 8-11-06,

5. Thereafter, the accused petitioner moved a
petition under section 265C of the Code of Criminal
Procedure with prayer to discharge him. But the said
petition being rejected by order No. 7 dated 15-5-07,
the trial Court framed charge under section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act (NI Act), Thus being
aggrieved, the accused moved this petition for
quashment and obtained the instant Rule,

6. The learned Advocate Mr MA Muntakim,
appearing for the accused petitioner, submits that
the liability is one that arose out of business trans-
action, and that the dispute between the parties
could be decided out of the court as per the agree-
ment dated 12-5-2005, and that the dispute is of civil
nature. The main point agitated by the learned
Counsel for the petitioner is that, the leamed Metro,
Assistant Sessions Judge did not take into consider-
ation the fact that the petitioner did not serve the
statutory legal notice in respect of dishonor of the
cheques and that the accused never received the said
notice, and that there remaining a specific clause in
the agreement to resolve the dispute or misunder-
standing, if any, by arbitration the case was not tri-
able by a criminal Court. As such, the complaint
petition does not disclose any offence, hence the
impugned proceedings is liable to be quashed,

7. Mr MA Muntakim, the learned Advocate
appearing for the added opposite party No.2 the

complainant beneficiary of the cheque, drawing our
attention to the complaint petition annexed, submits
that there is clear statement made in the complain,
petition to the effect that notice under the NI Act hig.
been duly served and was duly received by the
accused, The learned Counsel mainly submits thar,
the question as to whether notice under section 13%
of the Negotiable Instruments Act was served or not,
being a question of fact, that issue cannot be decid-
ed under section 561A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure by the Hon'ble High Court Division and
that other submissions advanced by the petitioner
does not merit consideration as the same do not bar
launching a prosecution under section 138 of the NI
Act. In support of his contention, the learned
Advocate for the opposite party No. 2, has cited a
decision, reported in 60 DLR (AD) 195, Nizamuddin
Mahmood vs Abdul Hamid Bhuiyan and others.

8. We have considered the submission of the
learned Advocates, perused the materials on record
as well as the relevant law and the decision cited.

9. The submission made by the learned
Counsel for the accused petitioner as to whether the
notice served or not, as required to be served under
section 138 of NI Act, is essentially a question of
fact, to be proved by adducing evidence at the time
of trial, inasmuch as there is specific assertion in the
complaint petition that such a notice was, in fact,
served. Hence, this fact cannot be decided by this
court exercising jurisdiction under section 561A of
the Code of Criminal Procedure and this is to be
decided by the trial Court upon receiving evidence.
The principle of law in this respect has been set at

rest by the Appellate Division in the case cited
above.

10. The other contentions raised on behalf of
the accused petitioner are equally devoid of any
merit, inasmuch as a prosecution launched under
section 138 of the NI Act is different from one
launched under sections 420/406 of the Penal Code.
Not only the ingredients are different between the
offences punishable under these two statutes, rather
the liability under section 138 of the NI Act, as
imposed for dishonour of cheque, is a strict liability.


            
11. Upon perusal of the provision of section
138 of the NI Act, 1881 (as amended on February 9,
2006), we are of the considered view that the liabil-
ity created under section 138 of the NI Act, 1881 is
a strict liability, that only requires proof of the fac-
tum of dishonour of the cheque in question and
compliance of the procedural pre-conditions for
Jaunching the prosecution under that section. No
alibi is available, in such case, to the accused, except
z case that the cheque in question had become stale
before it was dishonoured or that the procedural pre-
conditions were not complied with in the manner
and within the time specified under the relevant pro-
vision of the NI Act or that the signature of the
drawer was forged or that the cheque in question
was 2 lost cheque; which are all based on facts to be
proved by adducing evidence before the trial Court.
Mens rea need not be proved, nor the accused in
entitled to the presumption of innocence in such a
case. Nor the availability of civil or any other alter-
native forum would stand as a bar in launching a
prosecution under section 138 of the NI Act, 1881.
There appears no intention on the part of the legis-
lators to give any benefit of doubt to an individual
accused in a case under section 138 of the NI Act,
1881; rather, intention of the legislators appears to
be to secure beneficial interest of the drawee of a
cheque, as in apparent from a mere perusal of this
section. This intention of the legislators has been
made further clear by incorporating section 138A in
the NI Act, 1881, prescribing provision for deposit-
ing not less than 50% of the amount of the dishon-
oured cheque is a pre-condition for filing appeal
against any order or sentence under sub-section (1)
of section 138,

12. Mere presence of the arbitration clause
does bar launching of a criminal case, if the com-
plaint discloses a prima facie case. We find support
for our view from the case reported in 2002 SCC
(Cri) 129, SW Palanitkar vs State of Bihar.

13. We have found that the petition of com-
plaint discloses a prima facie case under section 138
of the NI Act.

14. In view of the discussions and the findings
made hereinbefore and for the reasons stated above,
we are of the opinion that the instant Rule is devoid
of any merit.

15. In the result the Rule is discharged.

16. The order of stay granted earlier by this
court is hereby vacated.

Communicate the order,


HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)
Shahidul Islam J

Mahabub Alam Farug (Md)

Syeda Afsar Jahan J | and another... ... Petitioners
vs

Bangladesh, represented by

Judgment the Secretary, Ministry of

August 17th, 2009 Land and others...............
sceveeusaeseeceaes Respondents*

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102

Mutation of name by opening a separate
Khatian—Md Khairul Huda transferred the
property in favour of the plaintiffs which is evi-
dent from sale deed Annexures F and F(1), The
deed has not been challenged by the Govern-
ment. So long the decree passed by the Civil
Court Annexure-C series are set aside, the
respondents are duty bound to receive rent from
the petitioner, inasmuch as they have purchased
the land from Md Khairul Huda,

Md Abdul Haque, Advocate—For the Petitioners

ARM Hasanuzzaman Assistant Auorney-General—

For the Respondents,

Writ Petition No, 87 of 2008.

            
Judgment

Shahidul Islam J: This Rule Nisi was issued
calling upon the respondents as to why they should
not be directed to mutate the names of the petition-
ers in the records of right by opening a separate
Khatian in their names and to receive rents from the
petitioners for .06 (point Zero Six) acres of land of
CS khatian No. 71 CS Plot No, 971 SA Plot No.
2740 Hal plot No. 3389 of Mouza Gouripur, Police
Station Gouripur District-Mymensingh, being own-
ers by purchase through registered deeds of sales
evidenced by Annexures-F and Fl to the Writ
Petition, and/or pass such other or further order or
orders passed as to this Court may seem fit and
proper.

2. Facts relevant for disposal. of the Rule are
that one Md Khairul Huda was the awner of the land
situated at Mouza Gouripur police Station Iswargonj
new Police Station Gouripur District-Mymensingh
under CS Khatian No. 71'& CS Plot No. 971 SA
Khatian No. 941 SA Plot No.:2740 area of land .06
acre land and he was possessing the land. The SA
record of the land was wrongly published in the
name of the previous owners of the land instead of
Md Khairul Huda. As such Md Khairul Huda being
the plaintiff initiated other class suit No, 242 of
1981 in the Court of Munsif Iswargonj for declara-
tion that the SA record is wrong since it has not been
recorded in the name of Md Khairul Huda. That
after creation of Courts in the Upazila, Gouripur the
case was transferred to the Court of Upazila Munsif
Gouripur and the case was renumbered as’ Other
Class Suit No. 56 of 1983 which is evident from
Annexure-E,

3. The Government submitted written state-
ment in the said suit and the said suit was decreed ex
parte by the judgment and decree dated 26-7-1984
which is evident from Annexures-C and D.

4. Thereafter said Md Khairul Huda, trans-
ferred the property by kabala deeds dated 21-4-2002
in favour of the petitioner No, 2 and petitioner No, 1
which is evident from Annexure-F and F(1). The
Property was recorded in the filed khatian in the
name of Md Khairul Huda which is evident from

Annexure A, Thereafter the petitioner made a
prayer before the ADC Revenue for accepting rey,
from them but in vain and, as such, by serving a
notice demanding justice the petitioners requested the
respondent for receiving rent from them but with no
response and, as such, they have moved this Cour,

5. Mr Md Abdul Haque, the  learneg
Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, submitteg
that in view of the admitted ownership of the petj-
tioner they are entitled to pay rent and the respon-
dents are obliged to receive rent. He prayed for
making the Rule absolute.

6. Mr ARM Hasanuzzaman, the learned
Assistant Attorney-General, appearing for the
respondents, after perusal of the Writ petition and
the Annexures annexed therein, submitted that the
Tespondent may be directed to dispose of the appli-

cation submitted by the petitioner before the ADC
(Revenue).

7. We have considered the submissions made
by the leamed Advocate. It appears that admittedly
Md Khairul Huda, owner of the Property, got a
decree from civil Court declaring title in his fav. our.
The filed khatian was prepared in the name of Md
Khairul Huda which is evident from Annexure-E.
Thereafter Md Khairul Huda transferred the proper-
ty in favour of the plaintiffs which is evident from
sale deed Annexures-F and F(1). The deed has not
been challenged by the Government.. So long the
decree passed by the Civil Court Annexure-C series
are set aside, the respondents are duty bound to
receive rent from the petitioner, inasmuch as they
have purchased the land from Md Khairul Huda.

From the facts and circumstances and the dis-
Cussions made above we find merit in the Rule. In
the result, the Rule is made absolute, however with-
out any order as to costs. The respondents are
directed to receive rent from the petitioner upon
mutating their names as per law. The respondents
are further directed to inform this Court about the
compliance thereof within 45 days from the date of
the receipt of this judgment.



            
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Special Original Jurisdiction)
Moyeenul Islam Tofail Ahmed......Petitioner
Chowdhury J vs
AKM Abdul Hakim J} Chairman, Anti-Corruption
Judgment Commission and others......
February 25th 2010 Fo... eeeseeeseed Respondents*

Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007
Rule 2

Inquiry and Investigation—'Inquiry' and
yavestigation' are not one and the same. They
gre distinct terms. They are distinguishable from
each other. Investigation (SW) of a case can
only be commenced and carried out after conclu-
sion of inquiry (STH) and lodgment of an FIR
against a person.

Code of Criminal Procedure (v of 1898)
Section 94(1)(a)

The applicability of Clause (a) to the Proviso
to sub-section (1) of section 94 of the Code to the
investigation of an offence under any of the sec-
tions of the Penal Code has not been brushed
aside by the Appellate Division in the case report-
ed in 1996 BLD (AD) 200 = 2 BLC (AD) 78. ...(14)

Section 94

As section 94 of the Code does not contem-
plate seizure of any document from the custody
of a bank or a banker as defined in the Bankers'
Books Evidence Act, the question of seizure of the
bank accounts of Milon and Abdul Momin Tulu
by the concerned officers of the defunct Bureau
of Anti-Corruption does not arise at all. ......(17)

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1898)
Section 94(1)
The inquiry stage of an offence, the provi-
sions of Clause (a) to the Proviso to sub-section
re TEE

*Writ Petition Nos. 2094, 2095 of 2002.

He 5

(1) of section 94 of the Code cannot be called in
aid and the same are only meant for the purpose
of investigating offences under sections 403, 406,
408 and 409 and sections 421 to 424 (both inclu-
sive) and sections 465 to 477A (both inclusive) of
the Penal Code, with the prior permission in
writing of the Sessions Judge concerned. ...... (17)

Arab Bangladesh Bank Ltd vs Md Shahiduzzaman,
Deputy Director, Bureau of Anti-Corruption, Dhaka 1998
BLD 167 =51 DLR 145; Zennat Mosharraf vs Md Sirajul
Hug, District Anti-Corruption Officer 55 DLR 457 and
Messrs Hamidia Oil Mills vs District Anti-Corruption
Officer Chittagong 1996 BLD (AD) 220 = 2 BLC (AD)
78 ref.

Rokanuddin Mahmud with Mohammed Mutahar

Hossain, Advocates—For the Petitioner.

Md Khurshid Alam Advocate—For

Respondent No. 1.

Khan,

Judgment
Moyeenul Islam Chowdhury J: As the questions
of laws and facts involved in Writ Petition Nos.
2094 of 2002 and 2095 of 2002 are virtually one and
the same, they have been heard together and this
consolidated judgment disposes of both of them.

2. In both the Writ Petitions, Rules Nisi were
issued calling upon the respondents to show cause
as to why the orders dated 17-4-2002 passed by the
Sessions Judge, Bhola in Miscellaneous Case Nos.
174 and 175 of 2002 should not be declared to be
without lawful authority and of no legal effect
and/or such other or further order or orders passed as
to this Court may seem fit and proper.

3. Facts leading to the issuance of the Rules
Nisi are, in brief, as follows:

The petitioner is a citizen of Bangladesh. He
was elected a Member of Parliament from two con-
stituencies in Bhola in the general elections held in

            
June, 1996. Anyway, he became the Minister for
Commerce and Industries in 1996 and continued to
be so till 1998 when the Ministry of Commerce was
separated whereupon he remained the Minister for
Industries till 15th July, 2001, Thereafter the
Parliament stood dissolved and a Caretaker
Government took over the reins of the Government
for holding the next general election. He is an emi-
nent political leader of this country. He participated
in the War of Liberation in 1971, In course of his
political career, he was unjustly and unlawfully
detained and imprisoned by various military and
dictatorial Governments both during the Pakistan
period and the post-liberation period of Bangladesh.
Even during the last BNP regime between 1991-
1996, he was unlawfully detained by the Govern-
ment for his participation in the movement for
establishment of Non-party Caretaker Govern ment
for the purpose of overseeing general elections in
Bangladesh. Be that as it may, the respondent Nos.
2 and 3 made applications to the respondent No. 4
for permission to seize documents relating to the
bank accounts of one Milon and Abdul Momin Tulu
in Bhola alleging that the petitioner had sent about
Taka 6 crore illegally to each of the said accounts for
election purposes and it was so required for enquiry
into allegation of acquisition of wealth dispropor-
tionate to his known sources of income. No pro-
ceedings were initiated against the petitioner under
the relevant provisions of the Anti-Corruption Act,
1957 (since repealed). However, section 94 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure allows a Police Officer
to order production of any document, if such pro-
duction is considered necessary or desirable, for the
purpose of any investigation or inquiry; but no such
order requiring the production of any document
shall be made which is in the custody of a bank or a
banker as defined in the Bankers’ Books Evidence
Act, 1891 and relates, or might disclose any infor-
mation which relates, to the bank account of any
person except, for the purpose of investigating an
offence under sections 403/406/408 and 409 and
sections 421 to 424 (both inclusive) and sections
465 to 477A (both inclusive) of the Penal Code, with

the prior permission in writing of a Sessions Judge:
and in other cases, with the prior permission in writ,
ing of the High Court Division. The respondent Nig
4 has no jurisdiction under the law to grant permis.
sion for scizure of the bank documents and the
impugned orders are arbitrary, malafide and withoy,
lawful authority.

4. No Affidavit-in-Opposition has been fileq
on behalf of the contesting respondent No. 1, as it js
a matter of interpretation of the relevant law.

5. At the outset, Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud,
the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the peti-
tioner, submits that the terms ‘inquiry’ ("F747") and
‘investigation’ (S48) have different meanings and
connotations and admittedly, no case was initiated
against the petitioner by way of lodgment of an FIR
with the concerned Police Station and that being so,
Clause (a) to the Proviso to sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 94 of the Code of Criminal Procedure will not
be applicable and in this perspective, the petitioner
did not have a fair deal before the learned Sessions
Judge of Bhola.

6. Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud further submits
that there is no provision for seizure of the bank
account of any person as is evident from section 94
of the Code of Criminal Procedure and in this view _
of the matter, the impugned orders are ex-facie with-
out lawful authority and of no legal effect.

7. Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud next submits that
the impugned orders are not sustainable in law,
regard being had to the principles enunciated in the
cases of Arab Bangladesh Bank Lid vs Md
Shahiduzzaman, Deputy Director, Bureau of Anti-
Corruption, Dhaka reported in 1998 BLD 167 = 51
DLR 145 and Zennat Mosharraf vs Md Sirajul Hug.
District Anti-Corruption Officer reported in 55 DLR
457.

8. On the contrary, Mr Md Khurshid Alam
Khan, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of
the respondent No, 1, submits that in view of the
provisions of sections 38(3) and 19 of the qafe az

            
afiriq wigs, 2008 read with Rule 20 of the WHS
wan sfirta fafietett, 004, the learned Sessions
Judge is empowered to accept such applications as
are made to him on behalf of the respondent No. |
and accordingly, the leamed Sessions Judge passed
the impugned orders only to facilitate the inquiry
into the allegation levelled against the petitioner. In
support of this submission, Mr Md Khurshid Alam
Khan has drawn our attention to the decision in the
case of Messrs Hamidia Oil Mills ys District Anti-
Corruption Officer Chittagong reported in 1996
BLD (AD) 220 = 2 BLC (AD) 78.

9. Mr Md Khurshid Alam Khan next submits
that the leamed Sessions Judge did not commit any
illegality in passing the impugned orders and, as
such, no exception can be taken thereto.

10. We have heard the submissions of the
learned Counsel Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud and the
counter-submissions of the learned Counsel Mr Md
Khurshid Alam Khan and perused the Writ Petitions
and relevant Annexures annexed thereto.

11. Admittedly, no FIR was lodged against the
petitioner with any Police Station under section 154
of the Code of Criminal Procedure with reference to
his alleged graft. To be more precise, no prosecu-
tion was launched against him for alleged acquisi-
tion of wealth disproportionate to his known sources
of income. It is further admitted that the allegation
brought against the petitioner is at the inquiry stage.
In the schemes of the Gaife Warm Bir GEA, and the
ifs aR sew fafeatH, 2009, ‘inquiry’ (PTH)
precedes ‘investigation’ (S4@) provided a prima

Jacie case is found during inquiry. By the way, the
definition of ‘inquiry’ (SPTaT) and ‘investigation’

_ (SF®) as given in Rule 2 of the Fife WA
faferen, 2004 may be quoted below verbatim:


12. From the above, it is easily understandable
that ‘inquiry’ and ‘investigation’ are not one and the
same. They are distinct terms. They are distin-
guishable from each other. Investigation (S#Z) of a
case can only be commenced and carried out after
conclusion of inquiry (S74) and lodgment of an
FIR against a person.


13. At this juncture, a pertinent question arises:
whether the provisions of section 94 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure will be applicable to the facts
and circumstances of the present case? In this con-
nection, it may be noted that in the parent legisla-
tion, that is to say, in the Gf WAR shir BTA,
2008, there is no non-obstante clause making the
same an over-riding one as a whole, though some of
the provisions have been made over-riding. For
example, section 20(1) of the Fare HAA Shr IRA,
008, reads as under:

So, it appears that the offences contemplated by
the ali wR Sfipry OTA can be investigated only
by the Fife HAA sfier, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary contained in the Code of Criminal

            
Procedure, The over-riding effect of section 20(1)
has been restricted to the investigation of the
offences contemplated by this law by the FNS wrt
sfiia WIR. What we are driving at boils down to
this: the FUfS FAR BAP WBA has not been made an
over-riding law as a whole.

Section 38(3) of the 

as follows:

Neither party disputes this provision of law. In
particular, Mr Rokanuddin ‘Mahmud has conceded
that the Gaife WIA SEP has the legal right to make
an inquiry into any allegation levelled against any
person in pursuance of sub-section (3) of section 38
of the Gils WIA Sint GIR, despite the repeal of
the Anti-Corruption Act, 1957.

Section 19(1) of the said Ain provides:



From a bare reading of section 19(1), it seems that
the yife way fir shall have the jurisdiction,
inter alia, to recover and produce any document
during inquiry or investigation into any allegation.
But the modality or the procedure of recovery and
production of any such document, has not been laid
down in the Wife waa spt GTR, or for that mat-
ter, the Fife waa @fier fafa. Incidentally, Rule

20(1) of the said Bidimala may be adverted to, Rule
20(1) runs as under:


Clause (Kha) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 20 of the Fife
war shirts fates indicates that the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure will be applicable
as far as practicable in all other fields insofar as they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ain.
We do not find any rationale behind framing of Rule
20(1)(Kha). The wifs way ser false, 2004
are, no doubt, a subordinate or subsidiary legisla-
tion. In our opinion, a similar provision like Rule
20(1) (Kha) should have been engrafted in the par-
ént law itself, that is to say, the Fife 7A sfiem
IRA, 2008 | By mere framing of Rule 20(1)(Kha)
in the subordinate legislation (Gifs WIA sim
fafa) the applicability of the provisions of sec-
tion 94 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to the
facts and circumstances of the instant case cannot be
negated. Although the leamed Sessions Judge did
not refer to any specific provision of law under
which he passed the impugned orders; but presum-
ably, he had the provisions of section 94 of the said
Code in view and passed the orders thereunder
impliedly. For proper appreciation, the relevant pro-
visions of section 94(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure may be reproduced below:

"94(1). Summons to produce document or
other thing. (1) Whenever any Court, or any
officer in charge of a police-station considers
that the production of any document or other

            
thing is necessary or desirable for the purposes
of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other pro-
ceeding under this Code by or before such
Court or officer, such Court may issue a sum-
mons, or such officer a written order, to the per-
son in Whose possession or power such docu-
ment or thing is believed to be, requiring him to
attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the
time and place stated in the summons or order:

Provided that no such officer‘ shall issue
any such order requiring the production of any
document or other thing which is in the custody
ofa bank or a banker as defined in the Bankers’
Books Evidence Act, 1891 (XVIII of 1891), and
relates, or might disclose any information
which relates, to the bank account of any person
except,

(a) for the purpose of investigating an
offence under sections 403, 406, 408 and 409
and sections 421 to 424 (both inclusive) and
sections 465 to 477A (both inclusive) of the
Penal Code, with the prior permission in writ-
ing of a Sessions Judge; and

(b) in other cases, with the prior permission
in writing of the High Court Division."

Clause (a) to the Proviso to sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 94 of the said Code envisages that for the pur-
pose of investigating an offence (not inquiring into
an offence) under sections 403, 406, 408 and 409
and sections 421 to 424 (both inclusive) and sec-
tions 465 to 477A (both inclusive) of the Penal
Code, an order may be made requiring the produc-
tion of any document or other thing which is in the
custody of a bank or a banker as defined in the
Bankers’ Evidence Act, 1891 (XVIII of 1891), and
relates, or might disclose any information which
relates to the bank account of any person. The bank
account of a person is no doubt a classified docu-
ment. In any of the offences referred to above, it can
be produced from the custody of a bank or a banker
with the prior permission in writing of the Sessions
Judge concemed and in other cases, with the prior
permission in writing of the High Court Division.

14. Coming back to the decision in the case of
Messrs Hamidia Oil Mills vs District Anti-
Corruption Officer, Chittagong reported in 1996
BLD (AD) 220 = 2 BLC (AD) 78 referred to by Mr
Md Khurshid Alam Khan, we hold that although
permission was accorded to deposit the connected
record in respect of the defalcation of Government
moncy to the tune of Taka 30 crore by several
importers in collusion with some bank officials in
view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of that
case, but the fact remains that the applicability of
Clause (a) to the Proviso to sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 94 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to the
investigation of an offence under any of the above-
mentioned sections of the Penal Code has not been
brushed aside by the Appellate Division.

15. As to the case of Zeenat Mosharraf vs Md
Sirajul Huq, District Anti-Corruption Officer report-
ed in 55 DLR 457 adverted to by Mr Rokanuddin
Mahmud, it transpires that the principle enunciated
in that case has no manner of application to the facts
and circumstances of the case in hand.

16. With regard to the decision in the case of
Arab Bangladesh Bank Ltd vs Md Shahiduzzaman,
Deputy Director, Bureau of Anti-Corruption, Dhaka
reported in /998 BLD 167 = 51 DLR 145 relied
upon by Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud, we find that the
provisions of section 94 of the Code have been
interpreted therein. According to that decision, sec-
tion 94 of the Code authorises the Court or any com-
petent police officer to ask a person, in whose pos-
session or power certain document or thing is
believed to be, which is necessary for the purpose of
any investigation, inquiry, trial or other legal pro-
ceedings, requiring him to produce it at the time and
place mentioned in the summons or order; but there
is no provision for seizure of such document.

17. As section 94 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure does not contemplate seizure of any doc-
ument from the custody of a bank or a banker as
defined in the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, the
question of seizure of the bank accounts of Milon
and Abdul Momin Tulu by the concemed officers of

            
the defunct Bureau of Anti-Corruption does not
arise at all, However, the impugned orders of the
learned Sessions Judge as are follows:

From a plain reading of the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 94 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, it appears that those are enabling provi-
sions; but by inserting a Proviso to sub-section (1)
of section 94, the enabling provisions as embodied
in said sub-section (1) have been circumscribed
under certain circumstances. So, our conclusion is
that at the inquiry stage of an offence, the provisions
of Clause (a) to the Proviso to sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 94 of the Code cannot be called in aid and the
same are only meant for the purpose of investigating
offences under sections 403, 406, 408 and 409 and
sections 421 to 424 (both inclusive) and sections
465 to 477A (both inclusive) of the Penal Code, with
the prior permission in writing of the Sessions Judge
concerned.

18. From the foregoing discussions and in the
facts and circumstances of the case, we find merit in
the Rules.

19. Accordingly, the Rules issued in Writ
Petition Nos. 2094 of 2002 and 2095 of 2002 are
made absolute without any order as to costs. It is
hereby declared that the impugned orders dated 17-
4-2002 passed by the learned Sessions Judge of
Bhola in Miscellaneous Case Nos. 174 and 175 of
2002 are without lawful authority and of no legal
effect. However, the Fife WA SPT may proceed
against the petitioner in accordance with law.

Let a copy of this judgment be immediately
transmitted to the respondent No. | for information
and necessary action.



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Criminal Revisional Jurisdiction)

Khondker Musa Barrister Mainul Hosein...
Khaled J .. Accused-Petitioner
Md Azizul Haque J vS

Judgment
February 18th, 2010

Md Ali Hossain and another,
cidiprivongstel Opposite Parties+

Code of Criminal Procedure (¥v of 149%)
Section 561A

Defence plea—Defence plea, which, a5 per
well settled principle, is to be decided by evidence
before the trial Court and not at all a ground for
quashment.

Hasan MS Azim, Advocate—For the Petitioner.

Abdur Razaque Khan with Md Nesar Ahi
Advocates—For Opposite Party No.1.

Judgment

Md Azizul Haque J : This Rule, on an applica-
tion under section 561A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, was issued calling upon the opposite par-
ties to show cause as to why the proceeding in
Criminal Case No.1 of 1994 under section 54 and 55
of the Industrial Relations Ordinance, 1969 (here-
after referred to as the Ordinance), pending in the
Second Labour Court, Dhaka, should not be
quashed and/or such other or further order or orders
passed as this Court may seem fit and proper.

2. By the Rule issuing order dated 23-7-1995,
all further proceedings of the said case were stayed.

3. The relevant facts found for disposal of the
Rule are that the opposite party No.1 Md Ali Hosein
as complainant filed the aforesaid Criminal Case
No.1 of 1994 against the petitioner-accused
Barrister Mainul Hosein, Managing Director
Chairman, Editorial Board of the New Nation
Publications Ltd. presently, New Nation Printing
Press, | RK Mission Road, Dhaka under sections 34

“Criminal Revision Case No.811 of 1995.

            
 and 55 of the Ordinance in the Second Labour
Court, Dhaka stating, inter alia, that he joined the
service of the New Nation Publications Ltd under
the petitioner on 1-9-1978 on daily basis and the
accused party appointed him as Senior Correction
Head of the New Nation Publications Ltd on regular
basis under the regulation of Wage Board Award by
office order dated 25-1-1979 with effect from 1-1-
1979. His last salary was Taka 2,750 per month and
pe worked till 22-9-88. Since then, he was not
wed to Work. He was neither dismissed nor ter-
ed from service, Thus, he was compelled to
IRO Case No.8 of 1992 in the said Second
Lebour Court, Dhaka. After trial, the said case was
disposed of by the judgment and order dated 26-10-
1993 directing the petitioner to allow the com-
plainant to join his post within 45 days from the date
of judgment. The complainant on 14-11-1993, 15-
11-1993, 20-11-1993, 21-11-1993 and 1-12-1993
went to the office of the petitioner to join his post
and submitted the joining letter, but the latter did not
receive his joining letter and allow him to join his
service. The complainant then sent his joining letter
by registered post on 5-12-1993 to the petitioner
with a prayer to accept his joining letter and allow
his to join his post. But the petitioner did not allow
him to join his post and wilfully violated the deci-
sion ie. the order and direction of the Second
Labour Court, and thereby committed the offence
under sections 54 and 55 of the Ordinance.

4. On receipt of the complaint, leamed
Chairman of the Second Labour Court, Dhaka found
prima facie case against the petitioner and issued
process accordingly. The petitioner surrendered in
the said Court and obtained bail. Thereafter, he
failed a petition under section 241A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure for discharging him from the
case. The Second Labour Court after hearing both
the parties rejected the discharge prayer and framed
charge against the petitioner under sections 54 and
55 of the Ordinance by order dated 19-6-1995,

5. Being aggrieved by this order, the petition-
er has come to this Court under section 561A of the

Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the pro-
ceeding of Criminal Case No.1 of 1994 and obtained
the Rule and stay order.

6. Mr Hasan MS Azim, learned Advocate

appearing on behalf of the petitioner, hax submitted
that admittedly, the New Nation Publications Ltd
was no longer in existence because of its winding up
and therefore the implementation of the judgment
and order dated 26-10-1993 of the Second Labour
Court by way of reinstatement of the complainant in
the service of the New Nation Publications Lid was
neither possible nor practicable. He has further sub-
mitted that the New Nation Printing Press is not a
Limited Company and it has distinct legal entity of
its own owned by the Ittefaq Group of Publications
Ltd and it has no liability of the New Nation
Publications Ltd. He has further submitted that a
company in liquidation cannot reinstate its employ-
ee and as such, there was no wilful failure on the
part of the petitioner to implement the decision
dated 26-11-1993 of the Second Labour Court. Thus
he has submitted that the facts alleged in the petition
of complaint do not constitute the offence under sec-
tions 54 and 55 of the Ordinance and as such, the
initiation of the proceeding of Criminal Case No.1
of 1994 is totally illegal and misconceived and the
same is liable to be quashed in order to prevent
abuse of the process of Court.

7. On the other hand, Mr Abdur Razaque
Khan, leamed Advocate appearing for the opposite
party No.1 complainant, has drawn our attention to
the petition of complaint and the judgment dated 26-
10-1993 of the IRO Case No.8 of 1992 and submit-
ted that admittedly, the New Nation Publications Lid
was wound up and its liabilities devolved upon the
New Nation Printing Press, that the petitioner by
name and as Chairman of the Editorial Board of the
daily Ittefaq/New Nation was the second party No.2
in the IRO Case No.8 of 1992 and he did not contest
the case and he was categorically directed to rein-
state the complainant and that in the petition of com-
plaint the petitioner has been designated as the
Chairman of the Editorial Board of the New Nation

            
Publications presently, New Nation Printing Press,
The learned Advocate for the opposite party No.1
has further submitted that "employer" in relation to
establishment includes a successor as has been
defined in section 2 (viii) (a) of the Ordinance and
thus, the New Nation Printing Press being the suc-
cessor of the New Nation Publications Ltd., the peti-
tioner was bound to reinstate the complainant in his
service and as he wilfully failed to implement the
decision of the Second Labour Court and breached
the same vide judgment dated 26-10-1993, offences
under sections 54 and 55 of the Ordinance have been
disclosed and as such, there is no reason to quash the
proceeding of the Criminal Case N.1 of 1994 as
prayed for.

8. We have heard the submissions of the
learned Advocates and considered the grounds taken
in the application under section 561A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and perused the documents
annexed thereto.

9. Admittedly, the New Nation Publications
Ltd has been liquidated. It is also admitted that the
petitioner by name and designation as the Chairman,
Editorial Board of the Daily Ittefaq/New Nation
Publications was the second party No.2 in the IRO
Case No.8 of 1992 and the case was allowed against
him by judgment dated 26-10-1993 and he was
directed to reinstate the complainant in the New
Nation Publications Ltd. There is no denial of the
fact that the petitioner did not reinstate the com-
plainant in his service and thereby he failed to
implement the decision of the Second Labour Court,
Dhaka given by the judgment dated 26-10-1993
referred to above mentioned in the petition of com-
plaint. The petitioner Mainul Hosein has been des-
ignated as the Managing Director/Chairman of the
Editorial Board of the New Nation Publications
presently, New Nation Printing Press 1, RK Mission
Road, Dhaka showing that the liabilities of the New
Nation Publications Ltd devolved upon the New
Nation Printing Press. The term "Employer" has
been defined in section 2 (vii)(a) of the Ordinance.
As per given definition, "Employer", in relation to

an establishment means any person or body of per
sons, whether incorporated or not who or which
employs workmen in the establishment under a con.
tract of employment and includes an heir, successo,
or assign, as the case may be, or such person Or body
as aforesaid.

10. The trial Court framed charge against the
petitioner holding that the New Nation Printing
Press in the successor establishment of the New
Nation Publications Ltd. which is well covered by
the definition of the "employer" referred to above. |;
is contended on behalf of the petitioner that the New
Nation Printing Press is not the successor establish.
ment of the New Nation Publications Ltd. This is a
defence plea, which, as per well settled principle, is
to be decided by evidence before the trial Court and
it is not at all a ground for quashment.

11. In view of the discussion made above, we
have considered the petition of complaint and found
that there is clear allegation that the petitioner wil-
fully failed to implement the decision of the Second
Labour Court, Dhaka vide judgment dated 26-10-
1993 passed in the IRO Case No.8 of 1992 by not
reinstating the complainant in his service. The said
judgment is binding upon the petitioner and the alle-
gation is that he committed breach of the decision of
the Court. Thus, we find that the facts narrated in the
petition of complaint constitute the offence under
sections 54 and 55 of the Ordinance and, as such,
there is no reason to quash the proceeding of the
Criminal Case No.1 of 1994. So, we find no merit in
the Rule and it is liable to be discharged.

12. In the result, the Rule is discharged and the
stay order dated 23-7-1995 stands vacated, The
Second Labour Court, Dhaka shall proceed with the
case in accordance with law.

Send a copy of this judgment and order to the
Court concerned for information and necessary
action.



            
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)

Md Azizul Haque J | Shefali Bala.......Petitioner

Khalipur Pukurpara
Registered Non-Govern-
ment Primary School
Managing Committee rep-
resented by its President
and others. ‘
saeeve Ne Opposite Parties*

Judgment
Joly 2nd, 2009,

Code of Civil Procedure (v of 1908)
Section 115

Penalty like dismissal of a teacher from serv-
ice cannot be imposed by the Managing Com-
mittee of the School without prior approval of
the TPEC. It appears from the judgment of the
lower appellate Court that the Joint District
Judge did not consider this mandatory provision
of the government notification and thereby he
had committed as error of law resulting in an
error in the decision occasioning failure of justice
and, as such, on this score alone the judgment of
the lower appellate Court cannot be sustained in
law. The plaintiff is not thus entitled to get the
back salary as admittedly she did not render her
services to the school since the date of her dis-
missal.

Bivash Chandra Biswas and HM Borhan Advo-

cates—For the Petitioner.

None appears—For Opposite Parties 1 & 2.

Judgment
This Rule was issued under section 115 of the
Code of Civil Procedure calling upon the opposite
party Nos. | and 2 to show cause as to why the judg-
ment and decree dated 21-11-01 passed by the Joint
District Judge in Other Appeal No. 60 of 2001
reversing those dated 30-4-2001 passed by the

*Civil Revision No. 170 of 2002.

He 6

Assistant Judge-in-Charge, Baliadangi, Thakurgaon
in Other Class Suit No. 4 of 2000 decreeing the suit
should not be set aside and/or any other order passed
as to this Court may seem fit and proper.

2. The petitioner as plaintiff filed the afore-
said suit for declaration that her dismissal order
dated 19-6-1997 from service was illegal, collusive
and without jurisdiction, with a further declaration
that she was still in service and for an order of
mandatory injunction to the effect that the defen-
dants should not restrain her from work and must
give her salaries on the allegations, inter alia, that
she was appointed as a Teacher of the Khalipur
Pukurpara Registered Non-Government Primary
School in Upazila Baliadangi, district Thakurgaon
(hereinafter referred to as the school) on 3-1-92 and
she joined the school on 5-1-92 by donating Taka
20,000. The defendant Nos. | and 2 tried to appoint
defendant No. 6 in place of the plaintiff and the
defendant No. 2 created obstruction in plaintiff's
signing the attendance register. The plaintiff was
permitted to impart training from the PTI. The
Assistant Thana Primary Education Officer
(ATPEO) on 27-11-99 directed defendant No. 2‘not
to give the monthly allowance to the plaintiff.
Thereafter, the plaintiff filed an objection to the
defendant No. 7 on 13-8-97 and to the Deputy Com-
missioner, Thakurgaon on 25-5-98 in pursuance of
which the Deputy Commissioner directed the Thana
Primary Education Officer (TPEO) to enquire into
the matter and submit a report. The TPEO did not
file any report. The Deputy Commissioner then
directed defendant No. 5 to inquire into the matter
and submit a report, but the latter also did not obey
the order of the former. Thereafter, the Thana
Nirbahi Officer, Baliadangi (TNO) as per order of
the Deputy Commissioner made an enquiry into the
matter and submitted a report dated 28-12-98 stating
that the plaintiff was not absent from school, but she
was illegally dismissed from service and that the
two resolutions taken by the Managing Committee
of the School regarding the plaintiff were lost and
subsequently two resolutions were created illegally.
The defendant did not file any objection against the


            
report of the TNO. The service of the plaintiff was
confirmed on 3-1-94, The further case of the-plain-
tiff was that on 6-3-96 when Bashir Uddin inspect-
ed the school, he found the plaintiff present in
school. The plaintiff? on 15-5-2002 requested the
defendants Nos. | and 2 to allow her to join the serv-
ice but without success, Hence the suit.

3. The opposite party Nos. 1 and 2 as defen-
dant Nos, 1 and 2 contested the suit by filing a writ-
ten statement contending, inter alia, that the suit
was not maintainable in the present form. Their
case was that the school was recognised on 4-1-
1996 and since then no donation had been taken
from anybody. The plaintiff was absent from school
from September to December, 1996 and she was
also absent from January to August, 1997 without
leave. The ATPEO inspected the school on 23-3-97
and found the plaintiff absent. He again inspected
the school on 3-5-97, 17-6-1997, 22-7-97 and 21-8-
97 and the plaintiff was also found absent on those
days. Thereafter, the plaintiff was given two letters
dated 8-2-97 and 15-2-97 and she was dismissed
from service as per decision taken by the Managing
Committee. The TPEO on 22-7-97 visited the
school and found a post of the teacher vacant and
asked the Managing Committee to invite application
for appointing a teacher against the said vacant post
and accordingly, the defendant No. 2 gave a notice
to that effect which was published in the daily news-
paper on 18-8-97 and the defendant No. 6 was ulti-
mately selected for that post and she was given
appointment letter and she joined the post. Their
further case was that order of dismissal of the plain-
tiff was legal and the suit was liable to be dismissed
with costs.

4. The leamed Assistant Judge framed issues
in the suit. Both the parties adduced evidence on the
issues and the learned Assistant Judge having con-
sidered the cases of both the parties and evidence on
record held that the plaintiff was not absent from
school and she was illegally dismissed from her
service. He also found that the dismissal order was
illegal, inasmuch as the Managing Committee of the
school without obtaining the prior approval from the

Thana Primary Education Committee (short
TPEC) dismissed the plaintiff which was not win
tainable in law, He also found that the plaintiff was
entitled to get her back salaries and thus he decreeg
the suit.

5. Against the judgment and decree of the
learned Assistant Judge, the defendant Nos. 1 and 2
preferred Other Class Appeal No. 60 of 2001 in the
Court of the District Judge, Thakurgaon which was
heard and disposed of by the learned Joint Districy
Judge, Second Court, Thakurgaon who allowed the
appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the tria|
Court and dismissed the suit on the finding that thy
plaintiff did not come to Court with clean hands an;
she was absent from school without the permissio;,
of the authority and she was working elsewhere ille.

gally.

6. Being aggrieved by, dissatisfied with, the
judgment and decree, the plaintiff preferred this
Revision and obtained the Rule.

7. Mr Bivash Chandra Biswas, learned Advo-
cate assisted by Mr HM Borhan, learned Advocate

appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has made his |

submissions. But no one appears on behalf of the
opposite party Nos. 1 and 2 at the time of hearing of
this revision.

8. It is by now well settled vide the decisions
held in the cases of Safaruddin vs Fazlul Hug, 49
DLR (AD) 151 and Darasatullah vs Manik Mondal
1984 BLD (AD) 234 = 36 DLR (AD) 88 that this
Court can dispose of the revision on merit in the
absence of both the parties or either party.

9. The learned Advocate appearing for the
petitioner has taken me through the impugned judg-
ment, judgment of the trial Court and the exhibited
documents and submitted that the learned Joint
District Judge committed an error of law in not con-
sidering the relevant circular issued by the Primary
Education Department providing mandatory provi-
sion that no teacher can be dismissed without the
prior approval of the Thana Primary Education
Committee. He further submits that this clearly

            
shows non-application of judicial mind of the
jeamed Joint District Judge. He further submits that
the decision of the learned Joint District Judge is
pased on surmise and conjecture. He also submits
that the findings of the learned Assistant Judge are
pased on legal evidence on record and the findings
of the leamed Joint District Judge are the products
of misreading of the evidence and non-appreciation
of law. He further submits that the learned Assistant
judge rightly held that the ATPEO Md Khademul
sam, in order to appoint his cousin Jesmin Akhter
namely, defendant No.6, as a teacher in place of the
plaintift, purposely inspected the school thrice in
1997, though normally the school is inspected once

ayear, and he influenced the defendant No.2 to issue «

a show cause notice on the plaintiff and to dismiss
her from service on the ground of her absence. The
Jeamed Advocate further submits that the trial Court
was right in finding that the UNO enquired into the
matter physically and rightly found that the plaintiff
was never absent from school and the relevant reso-
lutions were taken illegally and subsequently, a new
resolution book was created to replace the earlier
two resolutions regarding the plaintiff to serve their
purpose. He further submits that the lower appellate
Court misread and misconstrued the evidence on
record and thereby committed an error of law in
passing the impugned judgment and decree resulting
in an error in the decision occasioning failure of jus-
tice. Thus, he submits that the judgment and decree
of the lower appellate Court should be set aside and
consequently, the Rule is fit to be made absolute,

10. T have heard the submissions of the learned
Advocate and gone through the plaint, written state-
ment, judgments of the Courts below and evidence
on record, It is admitted that the school was estab-
lished in 1991 and got registration on 4-1-96 being
No.4102/II. It is also admitted that the plaintiff was
appointed as a teacher of the school on 3-1-92 and
she was asked to join the school within 7(seven)
days and accordingly, she joined the school on 5-1-
92. There is no dispute that the service of the plain-
tiff was confirmed,

11. On perusal of the evidence on record and
judgment of the trial Court, it appears that the

learned Assistant Judge, as per report dated 28-|2-
98, Exhibit 1, submitted by Md Abdullah-hel-Baki,
TNO rightly found that the plaintiff was not absent
from school, she became a victim of the circum-
stances and she was illegally dismissed from her
service in order to make a scope for appointing
defendant No.6 Jesmin Akhter, cousin of the ATPEO
Md Khademul Islam as admitted by himself as DW
3, as a new teacher in her place and she was illegal-
ly dismissed without giving her any show cause
notice. It appears from Exhibit 1, report of the TNO,
that he did not find relevant resolutions regarding
the plaintiff in the resolution book that was called
for by the learned Assistant Judge, who on the basis
of evidence, rightly held that the said two resolu-
tions were re-written subsequently to justify the dis-
missal of the plaintiff. The learned Joint District
Judge, it appears, reversed the findings of the trial
Court but without assessing the evidence as has
been done by the trial Court referred to above and |
find that the appellate Court's findings are based on
non-reading of evidence, surmise and conjecture.
Therefore, I must set aside the findings of the lower
appellate Court though it is the final Court of fact.
This view of mine is well supported by the decision
held in the case of Hussain Ahmed Chowdhury alias
Ahmed Hussain Chowdhury vs Md Nurul Amin
1996 BLD (AD) 31= 47 DLR (AD) 162. The said
decision is that when there are misreading of evi-
dence and non-consideration of some material evi-
dence, it becomes incumbent on the revisional Court
to consider the same and to arrive at proper findings
on the basis of the evidence on record and to finally
dispose of the case.

12. It is also admitted that the plaintit was dis-
missed by the Managing Committee without obtain-
ing prior approval from the TPEC. Paragraph 3 of
the Notification vide Memo No. s1*tf@/emi-o/SFRib/
99/089 Uifis on/s9/a9, TseETEE STI HIST,
enefire @ spatter fret, sere SAY, VI relates
to the responsibilities and duties of the Non-Govern-
ment Registered Primary School Managing Com-
mittee. Paragraph 3.10 of the aforesaid notification
dated 9-11-97 runs as under :

            
13. The dismissal from service is no doubt, a
major penalty. On a simple perusal of the above
quoted provisions of the said circular, it is clear that
the provisions are mandatory which provides that a
teacher of a Non-Government Registered Primary
School can’ be dismissed from service by the
Managing Committee only after taking approval
from the TPEC. Therefore, the penalty like dis-
missal of a teacher from service cannot be done by
the Managing Committee of the School without the
prior approval of the TPEC. It appears from the
judgment of the lower appellate Court that the
learned Joint District Judge did not consider ‘the
aforesaid mandatory provision of the government
notification and thereby he committed as error of
law resulting in an error in the decision occasioning
failure of justice and, as such, on this score alone the
judgment of the lower appellate Court cannot be
sustained in law. Thus, I find merit in the Rule. It
may be mentioned that the plaintiff is not entitled to
get the back salary as admittedly she did not render
her services to the school since the date of her dis-
missal. Without rendering service for a long period
of 7(seven) years, the plaintiff can hardly get the
back salaries. So, the decree is fit to be ‘modified to
that effect.

14. Accordingly, the Rule is made absolute but
without any order as to costs. The judgment and
decree dated 21-11-2001 passed by the Joint District
Judge, Thakurgaon are hereby set aside and those
dated 30-4-2001 passed by the Assistant Judge are
hereby affirmed with the modification that the inter-
vening period since the plaintiff's dismissal shall be
treated to be special leave without pay and other
benefits.

Send down the LC records accordingly.

Ed.

HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Civil Revisional Jurisdiction)
SM Ziaul Karim J | Abul Kashem....... Petitione;
VS
Judgment AKM Golam Mostafa ang
January 14th, 2009 | others........Opposite Parties

Code of Civil Procedure (Vv of 1908)
Section 115 Order V rule 11

State Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1959 °
(XXVIII of 1951)
Section 96(4)

The Court of appeal below without reversin;
the finding of facts relating to service of sum.
mons arrived at by the trial Court most erro.
neously held that without examining opposit,
party No.21 Nurul Huda as to the date of knowl.
edge, the opposite party No.23 Abul Quashem
failed to prove the date of knowledge. This view
of the Court of appeal below is absolutely wrong,
inasmuch as witness No.2 Abu Taher categorical-
ly stated that in his presence opposite party |
No.21 for the first time disclosed about the land
transferred to opposite party No.23. (16)

Abdur Rahman vs Shamsunnahar Begum 7 BLT
(AD) 125; Md Ismail vs Province of East Pakistan
through the Chief Secretary, Government of East Pakistar
16 DLR (AD) 438 and Hajarilal Mondal vs Md Mozaffe
Bepari 8 BLC (AD) 77 ref. |

Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan with Faroque Ahmed ani

Abdus Samad, Advocates — For the Petitioner.

Mihir Kanti Majumder, Advocate — For Opposi't
Party Nos.5-6.

Judgment
These Rules call in question the legality and
propriety of the judgment and order dated 18-2-
*Civil Revision No.1302 of 2003 with Civil Revision
No.1303 of 2003.

            
2003 passed by the learned Additional District
Judge, Second Court, Noakhali, allowing Miscel-
Janeous Appeal No.60 of 2001 and dismissing Mis-
cellaneous Appeal No.5! of 2001, heard analogous-
ly With Miscellancous Appeal No.58 of 2001 by set
ting aside those of the dated 15-5-2001 passed by
the leamed Senior Assistant Judge, Begumganj,
Noakhali, allowing pre-emption in| Miscellaneous
No.17 of 1999, These Rules having arisen out
of a common judgment, have been heard together
and are being disposed of by this judgment.

2. Short facts leading to these Rules are that
on 1-4-1999 opposite party Nos. 5-6 as pre-emp-
tors claiming as holding lands contiguous to the land
transferred instituted Miscellaneous Case No.17 of
1999 under section 96 of the State Acquisition and
Tenancy Act, 1950 (briefly as Act) in the Court of
Senior Assistant Judge, Begumgonj, Noakhali,
impleading the co-sharers tenants including the peti-
tioner for pre-emption of 0.36 acre of land out of
0.72 acre described in the schedule of the applica-
tion for pre-emption, transferred by Syed Noor Nabi

as vendor in favour of opposite party Nos. 1-4 as
pre-emptees by a registered kabala dated 26-10-
1997 at a consideration of Taka one lac. Subse-

quently the opposite party No,23 of the application’

for pre-emption, claiming as co-sharer by inheri-
tance in the holding, was transposed as co-pre-emp-
tor.

3. The pre-emptor's case, put in a nutshell, is

that opposite party No.5 Syed Noor Nabi having
owned and possessed the land under pre-emption
(briefly as land) transferred the land to pre-emptees
by registered kabala deed dated 26-10-1997 and the
same was entered into the book on 3-12-1998, no
notice was served upon them and the pre-emptees
are the strangers of the land under pre-emption. The
pre-emptors are the co-sharer tenants, holding lands
contiguous to the land transferred who came to
know about such transfer in the last part of Falgoon,
1405 BS. Thereafter they instituted Miscellaneous
case by depositing the consideration money for Taka
one lac along with statutory compensation at the rate

of Taka 10% thereupon for pre-emption of the land
transferred. The opposite party No.23 (herein peti-
tioner) was transposed as co-pre-emptor claiming as
aco-sharer by inheritance in the holding.

4. The pre-emptees contested the case by fil-
joint written objection denying all the material
allegations made in the application for pre-emption
contending, inter alia, that the land was transferred
within the knowledge of the pre-emptors by a regis-
tered kabala deed dated 26-10-1997. Before transfer
the vendor approached to all co-sharer tenants and
the tenants holding lands contiguous to the land
transferred to purchase but all of them had
expressed their inability to purchase the land. The
pre-emptees purchased the land for the purpose of
construction a dwelling house therein. After pur-
chase an improvement work has been made on the
land at a cost of Taka 1,25,000. Hence the pre-emp-
tors are not entitled to pre-empt the land transferred.

5. On the pleadings different issues were set-
tled including the issue of maintainability, and the
pre-emptors are entitled to get an order of pre-emp-
tion,

6. In course of trial the original pre-emptors
examined four witnesses, co-pre-emptor examined
two witnesses and pre-emptees examined three wit-
nesses in support of their respective cases.

7. After hearing the learned Judge of the trial
Court allowed the pre-emption to the effect that out
of 0.36 acre of land original pre-emptors will get
0.18 acre of land and co-pre-emptor will get rest
0.18 acre of land. Against which the co-pre-emptor
as appellant preferred Miscellaneous Appeal No.51
of 2001, pre-emptees as appellants preferred Miscel-
laneous Appeal No.S8 of 2001 and original pre-
emptors as appellants preferred Miscellaneous
Appeal No.60 of 2001, in the Court of District
Judge, Noakhali, ultimately all the appeals were
heard analogously by the learned District Judge,
Noakhali, who by the judgment and order dated 18-
2-2003 allowed the Miscellaneous Appeal No.60 of
2001 and dismissed other two appeals holding that

            
the application for transposition as co-pre-emptor
filed by the opposite party No.23 of the pre-emption
case, was barred by limitation.

8. Feeling aggrieved, the co-pre-emptor pre-
ferred the instant applications and obtained the pres-
ent Rules.

9. Mr Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan, the learned
Advocate appearing with Mr Faruque Ahmed,
Advocate for the co-pre-emptor petitioner secks to
impeach the impugned judgment and order on the
two-fold arguments. Firstly, the summons of the pre-
emption case was not duly served upon the co-pre-
emptor and on his behalf his brother Nurul Huda
(opposite party No.21) received the summons who
was not the recognised agent of the co-pre-emptor.
Secondly, the summons shown to have served can-
not be treated as good service, so according to him
the application under section 96(4) of the Act was
filed by a the pre-emptor within time and consider-
ing such facts the learned Judge of the trial Court
allowed pre-emption. In support of his contentions,
the learned Counsel refers the case of Abdur
Rahman vs Shamsunnahar Begum reported in 7 BLT
(AD) 125 wherein at paragraph No.6 it has been
observed:

“The High Court Division rightly held that
in the instant case there is no evidence that the
husband of the pre-emptee respondent was the
recognised agent of hers. Therefore, the sum-
mons was not duly served upon the pre-emptee
respondent. Limitation will start from the date
of knowledge which is 8-8-1986 and the pre-
emptee respondent filed Miscellaneous Case
No.4 of 1986 on 11-8-1986 well within the peri-
od of limitation as prescribed by Article 164 of
the First Schedule to the Limitation Act."

10. The learned Counsel further refers the case
of Md Ismail vs Province of East Pakistan through
the Chief Secretary, Govt. of East Pakistan report-
ed in 6 DLR (AD) 438 wherein it has been held :

“Notice served on a third person not good
notice."

11. The learned Counsel lastly submits that the
learned Judge of the Court of appeal below withou
reversing the finding of facts as to the service of
summons upon the co-pre-emptor, illegally alloweg
the appeal, thereby committed an error of law result.
ing in an error in the decision occasioning failure of
justice,

12. Mr Mihirkanti Majumder, the learneg
Advocate appearing for the original pre-emptors
(herein opposite party Nos. 5-6), opposes the Rules
and submits that the kabala under pre-emption was
registered on 26-10-1997 and it was entered in the
book on 3-12-1998 and the instant case was filed on
1-4-1999, the summons of the opposite parties of the
pre-emption case was served on 4-4-1999, so
according to him, subsequent application or transpo-
sition of the opposite party No.23 as co-pre-emptor
dated 7-7-1999 was barred by limitation. He lastly
submits that on consideration of the materials on
record the Court of appeal below rightly held that
the application for transposition of the opposite
party No.23 as co-pre-emptor was barred by limita-
tion, accordingly rightly dismissed the
Miscellaneous Appeal No.5] of 2001 which calls for
no interference by this Court.

13. In order to appreciate the submissions
advanced by the leamed Counsels I have gone
through the revisional application, pleadings, evi-
dences, all exhibits, judgments of the Courts below,
other materials on record and given my anxious
consideration to their submissions.

14. Now the question calls for consideration,
whether the learned Judge of the Court of appeal
below committed any error of law resulting in an
error in the decision occasioning failure of justice in
passing the impugned judgment and order,

15. On going to the materials on record, it tran-
spires that the original pre-emptors claiming as the
holding lands contiguous to the land transferred
prayed for pre-emption of 0.36 acre of land out of
0,72 acre described in the schedule of the applica-
tion for pre-emption impleading all co-sharer ten-

            
ants of the holding, Of them Abul Quashem opposite
party No.23 of the pre-emption case, on 24-6-1999
filed an application to transpose him as co-pre-emp-
tor claiming as co-sharer by inheritance. The said
application was rejected as barred by limitation as
well as an incomplete application. Again on 7-7-
1999 he filed a complete appellation under section
og(4) of the Act narrating his status and cause of
delay. For the convenience of understanding section
oo(4) of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act,
1950 it reads as hereunder:

“96(4) When an application has been made
under sub-section (1), any of the remaining co-
sharer tenants including the transferee, if one of
them, and the tenants holding lands contiguous
to the land transferred may, within the period
referred to in sub-section (1) or within two
months of the date of the service of the notice of
the appellation under clause (b) of sub-section
(3), whichever be earlier, apply to join in the
said application; any co-sharer tenant or tenant
holding land contiguous to the land transferred,
who has not applied either under sub-section (1)
or under this sub-section, shall not have any
further right to purchase under this section.”

16. It is pertinent to mention that the kabala

under pre-emption was registered on 26-10-1997
and it was entered into the book on 3-12-1998, the
Miscellaneous Case for pre-emption was filed on 1-
4-1999. Summons were served upon the opposite
parties on 4-4-1999. It appears from the report of the
process surveyor that opposite party No.1 Nurul
Huda received the summons on behalf of the oppo-
site party No.23 Abul Quashem, who did not him-
self receive any summons and even summons were
not approached to his family members and also it
was not served at his homestead by hanging.
Moreover, on perusal of the record it transpires that
co-pre-emptor is a businessman having a grocery
shop in Chittagong in the name and style "Alamin
Store". He used to stay in Chittagong for his busi-
ness purpose. These facts furnished corroboration
by the nationality certificate dated 14-11-1994

(Exhibit 8) issued by Chittagong City Corporation
and voter identity card (Exhibit 9) issued by the
Commissioner of Ward No,15, Chittagong City
Corporation. OPW 1 AKM Golam Mostafa, pre-
emptee and OPW 2 Md Safiullah also admitted in
their cross-examination that the co-pre-emptor Abul
Quashem used to stay at Chittagong.,He came to
know about such transfer on 20-6-1999 from his
brother opposite party No.21 Nurul Huda. On behalf
of co-pre-emptor witness No.2, Abu Taher also
deposed to that effect and corroborated such aver-
ment regarding knowledge. So, I hold that opposite
party No.23 Abul Quashem filed an application to
transpose as co-pre-emptor within time as pre-
scribed in section 96(4) of the Act. It is evident that
there is no material to show that opposite party
No.21 Nurul Huda was the recognised agent of
opposite party No.23, Abul Quesherm, so service of
summons upon opposite party No.21 who received,
the same on behalf of the opposite party No.23, can-
not be treated as good service. Therefore, the limi-
tation will start from the date of knowledge which is
20-6-1999 and the application under section 96(4)
of the Act was filed within time. The learned Judge
of the trial Court rightly held that summons were not
duly served upon opposite party No. 23 i.e. co-pre-
emptor. I am also in full agreement with such view
of the trial Court. It further transpires to me that it
is the discretion of the learned Court to allow the
subsequent application for transposition if it feels
necessary for the interest of justice and rejection of
earlier application is not a bar to file a subsequent
fresh application in this regard, It also appears to
me that the Court of appeal below without reversing
the finding of facts relating to service of summons
arrived at by the trial Court most erroneously held
that without examining opposite party No. 21 Nurul
Huda as to the date of knowledge, the opposite party
No. 23 Abul Quashem failed to prove the date of
knowledge. This view of the Court of appeal below
is absolutely wrong inasmuchas witness No. 2 Abu
‘Taher categorically stated that in his presence on 20-
6-1999 opposite party No. 21 Nurul Huda for the
first time disclosed about the land transferred to

            
opposite party No, 23 So, in my view this evidence
is siicient to prove the date of knowledge.

17. It transpires that after considering the evi-
dence on record both the Courts below concurrently
held that the pre-emptees are the strangers to the
Jand under pre-emption I do not find any misreading
‘on non consideration of the evidence to arrive at in
such findings of the Courts below, After appreciat-
ing the evidence on record I am also in full agree-
ment with the aforesaid views of the Courts below,
that the pre-emptees are the strangers to the land
under pre-emption.

It further appears that all the issues involved in
the suit have rightly been framed, considered and
decided by the trial Court with reference to the evi-
dence and materials on record but the impugned
judgment and order of the Court of appeal below is
not a proper judgment of reversal as it failed to con-
sider the evidence orally and documentary on record
and, as such, the Court of appeal below committed
an error of law resulting in an error in the decision
occasioning failure of justice. On perusal of the
impugned judgment and order passed by the learned
Court of appeal below, it appears that the learned
Judge without reversing the finding of facts arrived
at by the trial Court as to the service of summons
and limitation allowed the appeal and the same can-
not be sustained in the eye of law.

18. In the case of Hajarilal Mondal vs Md
Mozaffor Bepari reported in 8 BLC (AD) 77 where-
in it is held:

"It is a settled principle of law that the
lower appellate Court being final court of fact
will have to discuss and re-assess the evidence
on record independently while either reversing
or affirming the finding of the trial Court. In a
case of reversal it is more incumbent upon the
appellate Court to re-assess the evidence on
record and to arrive at his own independent
finding. In the instant case, the specific find-
ings of the trial Court have not been reversed by
the lower appellate Court exercising its Power
under Order XLI, rule 31 of the Code,
Accordingly, the trial Court's judgment ang
decree are restored.”

19. Moreover, the impugned judgment ang
order of the Court of appeal below in its entirety are
not well founded in the facts and circumstances of
the case. So, the grounds urged and contentions
advanced by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
are the correct exposition of law and facts and, as
such, the legal pleas taken by him prevail and appear
to have a good deal of force. On the contrary, |
failed to discover any merit in the submissions
advanced by the learned Counsel for the pre-emptor
opposite party Nos. 5-6.

20. Having considered the facts and circum.
stances of the case and foregoing narrative I am of
the view that the impugned judgment and order suf-
fers from legal infirmities which call for interfer-
ence by this Court. Thus the Rule having merit suc-
ceeds.

21. In the result, both the Rules are made
absolute without any order as to cost. The impugned
judgment and order dated 18-2-2003 passed by the

learned Additional District Judge, Second Court, |

Noakhali, so far it relates to allowing Miscellaneous
Appeal No. 60 of 2001 and dismissing the
Miscellaneous Appeal No. 51 of 2001 are hereby sei
aside and the judgment and order dated 15-5-2001
passed by the learned Senior Assistant Judge,
Begumganj, Noakhali, in Miscellaneous Case No.
17 of 1999 is hereby affirmed. The order of stay
granted earlier by this Court stands vacated.

Office is directed to send down the records of
this case at once with a copy of judgment for infor-
mation and necessary action.



            
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction)

KM Asaduzzaman J Nasiruddin (Md).....c0ccc0
MR Hasan J so Appellant
Judgment

august 12th, 2009

vs
Stat@is ncaa «+. Respondent*

special Powers Act (XIV of 1974)

gection 30

. In the absence of any cogent reason to disbe-
jee the members of law-enforcing agency, the
crt is competent to convict the accused relying
q their testimony without corroboration. The
Court should not take too rigid a view regarding
ire provisions of section 103 CrPC. See 54 DLR

222. ssse(32)

Criminal Procedure Code (Vv of 1898)
Section 103

Now it is time to review the criminal law, at
least to amend section 103 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898, to review the princi-
ple that burden of proof never shifts in criminal
cases, specially in the cases of corruption,
offences against sexual violence, murder of
women and children, trafficking in arms, drug,
narcotics, women and children. +439)

Anisur Rahman Gazi vs State 59 DLR 488; Abdul
Khaleque vs State 40 DLR 493; Abul Kashem vs State 50
DLR 356; Mahmudul Islam vs State 53 DLR (AD) 1;
Kashem vs State, 2001 BLD 442 = 54 DLR 212; Billal
Miah vs State 8 BLT 352; Mohinuddin vs State 61 DLR
35; Rana Madbar vs State 51 DLR 499; Naba Kumar vs
State, 1974 CrLJ 572 (SC); Kamruzzaman vs State, 1995
BLD 486 = 47 DLR 416; State vs Tayeb Ali, 1987 BLD
(AD) 265 = 40 DLR (AD) 6 and Krishna Mochil vs State
of Bihar 2002 SCC (Cri) 1220 ref.

SB Bhandary, Advocate—For the Appellant.

K
For the State-Respondent.

“Criminal Appeal No.4850 of 2005.

M Ejarul Haque, Deputy Attorney-General—

ne 7

Judgment

MR Hasan J: This appeal under section 30 of
the Special Powers Act, 1974 has been preferred
against the judgment and order dated 9-11-05 passed
by the Special Tribunal No.7, Narayanganj in
Special Tribunal Case No.184 of 2005, convicting
the accused under section 19(A) and (f) of the Arms
Act, sentencing him to suffer rigorous imprisonment
for 14 years and 7 years, respectively, and further
directing that both the sentences shall run concur-
rently and that the period during which the accused
was in jail custody shall be deducted from the term
of sentence and that the seized arms and ammuni-
tion be forfeited in favour of the State,

2. The case narrated in the FIR, in a nutshell,
is as follows :

The informant SI Mr Md Farooq Khalil 0!
RAB-3 and four others, all accompanying members
of RAB-3, after appearing before the Siddhirganj
Police Station, Narayanganj, along with the arrested
accused Nasir and the recgvered arms and ammuni-
tion, states that, on 14-3-2005, he along with the
other members of the force upon receiving a secret
information that one terrorist Nasir was staying in
his house, they raided his house and arrested Nasir
at about 14-35 hours from his house and after a long
interrogation Nasir informed that he holds some
arms and ammunition which he has kept concealed
within a heap of garbage located to the western side
of his house. As per admission of the accused, the
informant, along with the arrested accused and 4
other members of his force, went to the western side
portion of Nasir's house and that they have recov-
ered, as admitted by the accused Nasir and as taken
out by him, from inside the garbage, at. about 17-35
hours on the same day, one pistol made in Italy, one
revolver made in Japan, 2 bullets of pistol and 7 car-
tridges of gun (as fully described in the FIR) in pres-
ence of local witnesses (1) Abdul Hakim Bepuri (00)
and (2) Md Khokon (22) and the ‘accompanying
members of his force. The accused could not show
any valid documents for holding the arms and
ammunition, He then seized the said arms and
ammunition, which were packed in a polythene bag.


            
in presence of the witnesses, prepared seizure list
and obtained — signature of the — witnesses,
Accordingly, Siddhirganj Police Station Case No.19
dated 15-3-2005 has been recorded,

3. The case was duly investigated by police,
who then submitted a charge sheet No, 81 on 2-4-
2005, against the accused appellant under section
19(a) and (f) of the Arms Act. Finally, the case was
transmitted to the Special Tribunal No.7, Narayan-
gonj for trial and registered as Special Case No, 184
of 2005, wherein a charge was so framed on 12-5-05
against the appellant under section 19(a) and (f) of
the Arms Act, 1878. The charge was read over to the
accused-appellant in the open Court, he pleaded not
guilty of the charge brought against him and claimed
to be tried.

4. The prosecution examined as many as 10
witnesses and the defence examined none..

5. After conclusion of the evidence from the
prosecution side, the accused person was examined
under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, when he again pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried. He declined to adduce any evi-
dence in support of the defence case, but said that he
would place some documents, but no such docu-
ments were placed.

6. Defence case, as it appears from the trend
of cross-examination and the suggestion made dur-
ing trial, appears to be that the accused appellant has
been implicated in this case falsely and that he is
innocent and ‘that the prosecution case is one plant-
ed by the informant to secure to himself PPM.
Further case of the accused is that the recovery of
the ‘incriminating articles were not made from his
possession or control.

7. The learned trial Court after considering
the prosecution and defence cases as well as the oral
and the documentary evidence on record and the
material exhibits, has found the accused guilty of the
charge brought against him and convicted him
accordingly and sentenced as stated above, by the
impugned judgment and order,

8. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with
the aforesaid judgment and order dated 9-1 1-ys
passed by Special Tribunal No.7, Narayanganj, th.
appellant preferred this appeal before this Court,

9. Mr SB Bhandari, the learned Advocate
appearing for the accused appellant, mainly submits
that the seizure list witness did not support the pros-
ecution case of recovery of the arms and ammuni-
tion from, the possession or control of the accused
and that the place from which the recovery was
made was a public place and, as such, the arms and
ammunition in question cannot be said to have been
recovered from the possession or control of the
accused appellant. The learned Advocate further
submits that, the trial Court has not properly exam-
ined the accused as per provision of section 342 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure and, as such, the
trial is vitiated and that the case not being proved by
legal evidence, the impugned judgment and order is
liable to be set aside. In support of his contention,
the leamed Advocate for the appellant cited betore
us the decisions of some cases reported in 59 DLR
488, 40 DLR 493 and 50 DLR 356.

10. The learned Deputy Attorney-General
appearing for the State mainly submits that, the
incriminating articles were recovered at the pointing
out of the accused from the heap of cowdung and.
drawing our attention to the sketch map along with
the index attached therewith (marked as Exhibits 3
and 4), pointed out that the place from which the
arms and ammunition were recovered is within the
compound of the house of the accused and that there
is neither any evidence nor any suggestion in the
cross-examination from the defence side to the
effect that the place of recovery was meant for pub-
lic use or that the same was located outside the com-
pound of the house of Nasir and, as such, the incrim-
inating articles were recovered from the possession
and control of the accused. He further submits that,
the prosecution has been able to prove the case by
natural, independent and competent witness
including the eye-witnesses, who were present at the
place of occurrence, witnessed the recovery and
have corroborated the prosecution case in all material


            
particulars and, as such, the prosecution case has
been proved by legal evidence without any shadow
of doubt and the incriminating articles being recov-
ered from the exclusive possession and control of
the accused, the learned trial Court has rightly
passed the judgment and order, which does not call
for interference by this Court. He further submits
there is a long line of decisions from the apex Court
holding that, there is no reason to disbelieve Police
personnel so far as their evidence are not otherwise
impeachable.

11. In view of the facts and circumstances of
this case, the points for decision are, (i) whether the
incriminating articles were recovered from the exclu-
sive possession or control of the accused, (ii) whether
the trial has been vitiated for non compliance of pro-
cedure laid down under section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure (CrPC) and (iii) whether in the
facts and circumstances of this case the prosecution
has been able to prove the allegation brought against
the accused beyond reasonable doubt.

12. To arrive at the: decision, we are now
required to appraise for ourselves the entire evi-
dence on record, including the evidence of each wit-
ness, to arrive at the decisions on the points noted.

13. PW 1 SI Farug Khalil, RAB-3, and the
informant, deposed in Court that, while serving
under RAB-3, the informant received secret infor-
mation on 14-3-05 that a notorious terror Nasir was
staying at his home. Accordingly, the informant
along with 4 other members of his force, instantly
conducted an operation at the house of the accused
Nasir on 14-3-05 at about 14-35 hours and found the
accused in his house and apprehended him then and
there, and that after interrogating him the accused
ultimately admitted that he was holding some arms
and ammunition and that, as admitted and pointed
out by the accused, the accused himself had taken
out from the heap of garbage, at about 17-35 hours,
one pistol about 7" in length, written made in Italy
on its body, one revolver about 8" in length having
six chambers and made in Japan engrossed on its
body, along with 2 bullets of revolver and 7 car-
tridges, all packed inside a white polythene packet

and hidden inside the garbage, which is a heap of
cowdung, located at the western portion .of the
home of the accused, The informant then seized the
said arms and ammunition as recorded it in the
seizure list, proved before the Court and marked as
Exhibit 1 and his signature thereon marked as
Exhibit 1/1, PW 1 further deposed that, the seized
articles were in Court and he identified and proved
them before the Court, whereupon the pistol recov-
ered has been marked as material Exhibit I, the
revolver recovered has been marked as Exhibit 11,
revolver bullets has been exhibited as material
Exhibit III series, 7 recovered cartridges of gun
have been marked Exhibit IV series, and finally,
the polythene packet, inside which these articles
were kept, has also been produced and proved,
marked as material Exhibit V.  Thereafier he
informed the matter to his Senior Officer, lodged
the FIR with the Siddhirganj Police Station on 14-3-
2005, handed over the seized articles along with the
accused to the police station. He has also proved the
FIR as Exhibit 2 and his signature on the FIR as
Exhibit 2/1. He has also identified the accused pres-
ent on the dock. During his cross-examination, PW.
1 admitted that they have apprehended the accused
at about 14-30 hours and went to their office and
thereafter came back to the spot of recovery, where-
from the incriminating articles were recovered as
pointed out and taken out by the accused himsell!
This PW, during his cross-examination, has also
deposed that the place from which the incrim i
articles were recovered is a heap of cowdung and
that the place is owned by the accused and that the
seizure list witnesses and the members of his force
all were present at the time of recovery of the arms
and ammunition and that there was a gathering of
15/20 numbers of people at that time. The PW | has
denied the suggestion that the incriminating articles
were not recovered as per admission and as pointed
out by the accused or that those were not actually
recovered or seized or that the seizure list was not
prepared at the place of occurrence or that he has
filed this case by falsely showing recovery of the
said arms and ammunition to secure PPM to himself
or at the behest of the enemies of the accused or that


            
the accused was innocent or that no arms and
ammunition were recovered from possession of the
accused.

14. PW 2, SIT Md Mafizul Islam, serving under
RAB-3, has deposed that the accused was appre-
hended from his home on 14-3-05 and that the
incriminating articles were recovered on that date at
about 17-30 hours from a garbage, located about 50
yards from the house of the accused, and that at the
time of recovery he was present as a member of the
raiding party of the force. He further deposed that
the recovery was made in presence of the witnesses
and the accused himself has taken out the recovered
arms and ammunition from inside the garbage and
that the incriminating articles were kept inside a
polythene packet. He identified the accused stand-
ing on the dock. This witness has also corroborat-
ed the evidence of the PW 1. During cross-exami-
nation, this witness has asserted that his deposition
was recorded at the place of occurrence and that the
heap of garbage from which the articles were recov-
ered was located at the western side, about 50 yards
from the house of the accused and that the said place
belonged to the accused Nasir. He has further stat-
ed that he has not said this to the investigating offi-
cer (IO) because IO did not ask him this question.
He has denied the suggestion that no arms and
ammunition were at all recovered as per admission
and as pointed out by the accused or that he has
given false testimony.

15. PW 3 AB Mahmud, a member of the raid-
ing force of RAB-3, during his examination-in-chief
has corroborated the statements made by other pros-
ecution witnesses and deposed that they were 5
members in the raiding party and that on 14-3-2005
the incriminating articles were recovered, which
were kept inside a white polythene packet and
which were recovered as pointed out by and taken
out by the accused Nasir himself in presence of the
witnesses and that the recovered articles along with
the accused were handed over to the police station
and that the informant thereafter lodged. the FIR.
This PW has identified the arms and ammunition
and the polythene packet in the Court as well as the

accused standing on the dock. He has denied, while
cross-examined, that he gave statement to the I¢
after 5/7 days of the date of occurrence and that i,
was not a fact that the arms and ammunition were
not recovered as stated in the FIR.

This PW has also proved that the garbage from
which the arms and ammunition were recovered was
a heap of cowdung and the place was situated
towards the western side of the home of the accused
and that the seizure list was prepared at the place of
occurrence. He has denied the suggestion that, he
did not witness the occurrence.

16. PW 4 NK Mahbub Alam, a member of the
RAB-3, during his examination-in-chief he made
statement as PWs 1, 2 and 3, and has corroborated
their statements in all material particulars. During
cross-examination, he has denied the suggestion that
he did not state the fact of taking out of the arms by
the accused Nasir himself. He has further deposed
that there was a gathering of 15/20 peoples at the
time of occurrence, but denied the suggestion that
no arms and ammunition was recovered on the
pointing out of the accused and that he gave false
deposition at the direction of the superior officer,

17. PW 5 NK Md Jahangir Alam, another
member of RAB-3. He was tendered and the
defence declined to cross-examine him.

18. PW 6 SI Md Khalid Hossain, the second
investigation officer, who has undertaken and con-
tinued the investigation from 22-3-05. He has stat-
ed, during examination-in-chief, that the duty to
investigate into the case being entrusted on him by
order of the Ministry of Home, he has undertaken
the investigation since 22-3-05 and examined the
case docket, inspected the place of occurrence,
recorded statement of two witnesses under section

161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, he has

examined the sketch map and the index attached
therewith, as prepared by the former IO, as well as
he has examined the statements of other witness
recorded by his previous investigating officer SI
Mizanur Rahman, and that he conducted further
investigation, secretly as well as openly, and based

            
on his own investigation as well as on the findings
of the investigation of his previous Investigating
ofticer he, having found a prima facie case under
ection 19A and 19(f) of the Arms Act against the
cused, has submitted the charge sheet No. 81
gated 2-4-05. During cross-examination, he has
gimitted that it was not stated in the ejahar that the
jsused Was taken to the RAB office immediately
gfer he was apprehended. He has also admitted that
i did not prepare the sketch map or index, but
sorted that, these were prepared by his previous
gation officer and that on 25-3-05, he has
‘d the statement of the witnesses Mr AB
who and NK Mahmud. He has denied the sug-
gation that he did not inspect the place of occur-
rence and that without asking the witness anything
about the incident he has submitted a false charge
sheet as per direction of the authority and that he
gave false deposition.

19. PW'7 Hakim Ali Bepary, a local and
seizure list witness, during his examination-in-chief
has deposed that the date of occurrence was 14-3-05
and that the time of recovery was about 5-00 PM
and that, on the date of occurrence, the place from
which the arms and ammunition were recovered was
a heap of cowdung behind the home of accused
Nasir Miah. He further deposed that, while going to-
mosque at about 5-00 PM, the members of RAB
called him and obtained his signature on a paper. He
has deposed that he has heard about the fact of
recovery of arms and arrest of the accused Nasir. He
has further testified that one pistol and ammunition,
one revolver was recovered, but those were not
shown to him. He has also testified that Nasir was
at the place of occurrence and that he was in the cus-
tody of the RAB sitting at the door of his home.
This PW has identified his signature on the seizure
list marked Exhibit 1/2. During cross-examination,
this PW testified that he is an educated person and
he has identified the seizure list as Exhibit ] and has
admitted putting his signature on the seizure list. He

has’ corroborated, during the cross, that the place
from which the arms and ammunition were recov-
ered was about 50 yards from the home of Nasir the

accused and that Nasir was sitting at the door of his
home along with the members of the RAB, when he
was signing the seizure list. He further denied that
“OTA BIH aifaa CHT ACG Core wre Gera eH ATS
and that Sf cr ATC HBAS CHB CARB ATA *IPITEI
fe | He has denied that he concealed the truth.

20. PW 8 Md Khokan, a local and seizure list
witness, although later on declared hostile by the
prosecution, during his examination-in-chief, he
has deposed that the incriminating articles were
recovered on 14-3-05 from the heap of cowdung
within compound of the house of Nasir. He has
identified his signature on the seizure list which has
been marked as Exhibit 1/3. Being declared hostile
by the prosecution, he was cross examined by the
prosecution, when he denied the suggestion that,
having seen the revolver, pistol and bullets being
taken out by Nasir from garbage he had put his sig-
nature on the seizure list. He denied that he has
given false testimony being’ influenced by the
accused. This PW was also cross-examined by the
defence, ‘when he has deposed that he had put his
signature on 14-3-05 on the seizure list before the
Court and that the recovered articles were also in the
Court. He, however, stated that he did not read what
was written on that paper, nor the contents of the
Paper was read over to him and that he saw Nasir sit-
ting in the vehicle of RAB, when he signed the
Paper and that he did not see or hear from where the
arms and ammunition were recovered. He, however,
admitted that he put his signature on the date of
occurrence,

21. PW 9 SI Md Mizanur Rahman, the initial-
ly engaged investigating (IO), then working under
the Special Branch at Dhaka, during his examina-
tion-in-chief deposed that on 15-3-05 he was ser-
ving under the Siddhirganj Police Station and that
the informant, PW 1 SI Md, Farug Khalil, RAB-3,
accompanied by other members of his force came to
the police station, handed over the accused Nasir
Uddin along with the recovered pistol, revolver, 7
cartridges of gun and 2 bullets of revolver and
lodged the FIR and that the officer-in-charge
entrusted the job of investigation on him. Being

            
entrusted as such, he inspected the place of occur-
rence, took the recovered arms and ammunition into
his custody and recorded the statements of the wit-
nesses under section 161 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure’ and also interrogated the accused. He
further deposed that, during the course of investiga-
tion, he prepared the sketch map concerning the
place of occurrence and the Index attached there-
with and put his signatures on the map and on the
index. He has proved the sketch map prepared by
him, marked as Exhibit 3 and his signature on the
sketch map as Exhibit 3/1. He has also proved the
index prepared by him, which was marked as
Exhibit 4 and has proved his signature on the index,
which was marked as Exhibit 4/1. He has further
deposed that the arms and ammunition were taken
into his custody, and that these were placed before
the Court, which were identified by him and he has
also identified the accused Nasir standing on the
dock. During his cross-examination by the defence,
he has stated that on 15-3-2005, at 11-45 hours he
was entrusted with the assignment to investigate
into the case. He however, said that, in the sketch
map the place of occurrence was not described, but
the same has been described in the index attached to
the sketch map. He has also deposed that he record-
ed the statement of 4 witnesses, of which 2 are
members of the public and that the statement of the
public witnesses were recorded on the date and
place of occurrence. He has denied the suggestion
~ that PW Hakim Ali Bepari and PW.Md Khokan did
not make any statement before him. He further
denied the suggestion that he did not examine the
witness and that he has submitted a perfunctory
charge sheet and that he did not take-arms and
ammunition into his custody or that he gave false
deposition without knowing the place of occurrence,

22. PW 10 ASI Md Zahidul Haque, during his
examination-in-chief, deposed that on 15-3-05 he
was duty officer at Siddhirganj Police Station and
that he has recorded the FIR as lodged by the
informant as PW 1, He has also identified and
proved the FIR marked as Exhibit 5 and his signa-
ture on the FIR as Exhibit 5/1, respectively, He has

identified the accused standing on the dock, During
cross-examination, he has reiterated the statements
that he had made during the examination-in-chief,

23. Thereafter the accused was examined by
the trial Court under section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, drawing his attention to the
incriminating facts and circumstances, and the
accused was asked as to whether he would Pleag
guilty or adduce any evidence: in support of his
defence. The accused pleaded hot guilty and ass
declined to adduce any defence witness. Th;
accused then said that he does not have any thing 1
say, but he would submit some paper. However, n
such paper was found to have been submitted by the
accused.

24. Now paying our anxious attention to the
evidence on record, we found that PW 1 the inform.
ant has lodged the FIR stating specific time, place
and the fact of occurrence and of recovery too and
he has proved the seizure list and his signature on
the seizure list as well as also identified and proved
the accused person along with the recovered articles
marked as material Exhibits I, II, IV and V.

25. Our appreciation of the evidence shows
that, PWs 2 to 4 have corroborated the deposition o/
the PW 1 in all material particulars without any
noticeable discrepancies. PW 9, the investigating
officer, has duly inspected the place of occurrence,
prepared sketch map and the index attached there-
with, recorded deposition of 4 witnesses under sec-
tion 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as well
as interrogated the accused. PW 9 is not a member
of the RAB and he was serving in the Specid!
Branch under Siddhirganj Police Station. PW 6, the
next investigation officer, who later on continued
the Investigation from 22-3-05 had examined th:
case docket and the deposition recorded by his pre:
vious investigation officer and also considered the
index and the sketch map. He then himself inspect-
ed the place of occurrence, interrogated the accused
and having found a prima facie case against the
accused has submitted the charge sheet mentioned
above.

            
26. PW 7a local and humble businessman and
g seizure list witness has proved that the incriminat-
ing articles were recovered on 14-3-05 about 5-00
pM. He further deposed that he is an educated per-
sonand he has signed the seizure list and proved his
signature in the seizure list and also proved that the
Jace from which the articles were recovered was
spout 50 yards form the home of the accused Nasir.
He denied the defence suggestion that the arms was
not taken out by Nasir in his presence,

27. PW 8, another seizure list witness, a gar-
ment’s Worker, has proved that on 14-3-05 the arms
ani ammunition were recovered from a heap of
cowdung situated on the back side portion of Nasir's
home and that place is within the compound of the
house of the accused. He was declared hostile, but
while cross-examined by the prosecution, he denied
the suggestion that he has not seen the recovery of
the incriminating articles. While examined by the

defence, he stated that he has seen Nasir sitting on
the vehicles of the RAB.

28. Having assessed the evidence as recorded
above, we have found that the accused was appre-
hended by the members of the RAB-3, based upon a
secret information about his staying at his home.
These prosecution witnesses, all in a harmonious
voice, have deposed that the incriminating articles
were recovered on 14-3-05 at about 5-00 PM from a
place which is a heap of cowdung located about 50
yards west from the home of the accused Nasir,
within the compound of his homestead. It has been
established during cross-examination that the said
place was owned by Nasir and the sketch map con-
sidered with the index (Exhibits 3 and 4) clearly
shows that the place from which the arms and
ammunition was recovered as marked ‘@' which is
near to the accused Nasir’s home marked ‘s', From
the evidence on record, we have found that the place
from which the incriminating articles were recov-
ered is within the compound of the house of the

accused Nasir. This sketch map considered along
with the index corroborate the deposition of the
prosecution Witnesses, as to the place where from
incriminating articles were recovered, without any

shadow of doubt. Whereas the time and manner of
recovery have also been proved and the accused
duly identified by direct and legal evidence by the
prosecution, and the defence has not at all been able
to shake the basis of the prosecution case in any way
or to introduce any event that could have cast any
doubt about the prosecution case.

29. Now the question is, whether the place of
recovery is a public place or not. The place marked
“s" in the Index (Exhibit 4) is clearly within the
compound of the house of the accused, used to
deposit cowdung, cannot be believed to have been
intended for public use, while the members of the
public cannot be expected to trespass into this sepa-
rate and individual house of the accused Nasir to
deposit cowdung. The area, showing the separate
houses of other neighbours, is a private residential
area, not a public place. Hence, the contention that
the heap of cowdhury, from which the arms and
ammunition, Exhibit I to IV, were recovered, was a
public place cannot be accepted. Now looking at the
material exhibits, we also find that the arms and
ammunition were not only proved in this case, but
the white polythene bag in which the arms and
ammunition were preserved has also been proved
and marked as material Exhibit V. We have also
considered that, though there is no legal infirmity
had the Investigating officer himself investigated
into the case, but in his case, the investigation was
conducted by a different body of the law enforcing
agency. As such, on this ground as well we do not
find even a slice of material to hold that investiga-
tion was not natural or that the prosecution case was
a planted one, as suggested from defence side. We
have also anxiously considered the deposition of
the seizure list witnesses, including that of PW 8,
who was declared hostile, vis-a-vis the observation
of the trial Court as made in the impugned judg-
ment, in which referring to the deposition of this
seizure list witnesses, it has been observed that :

            
Supporting this observation of the learned trial
Court, we refer to the observation made by the Lord
Chief Justice (as his Lordship then was), made in a
ease between Malnudul Islam @ Ratan vs State
reported in 53 DLR (AD) 1, in which it has been
_ recorded that,

"We as judges are competent to take judi-
cial notice of the fact about the present condi-
tion of law and order situation in the country
and, as such, it is not unlikely that a witness will
hesitate to tell a truth for fear of his life."

Besides, similar notice has been taken in the
case between Kashem vs State, reported in 200]

BLD 442 = 54 DLR 212, wherein it has been held -

that,

"The Court should not take too rigid a view
regarding the provisions of section 103 of the
Code. In the absence of any cogent reason to
disbelieve the. members of law-enforcing
agency, the Court is competent to convict the
accused relying on their testimony without cor-
roboration."

30. We have taken notice of the accused being
a S218 AEM as proved by the PW 1. This is a rel-
evant fact to explain as to why ordinary people are
afraid of disclosing against this type of criminal.

31. We have examined this issue in a bit of
detail, so that the trend of judicial pronouncements
would make the views of this Court discernible on
this issue. Accordingly, we find that, in the case
between Billal Miah vs State reported at 8 BLT 352
it has been recorded that,

"In the context of realities of the society
few local witnesses are available to depose
against their powerful neighbours or habitual
miscreants. In almost all cases they come to the
Court to say that they signed blank papers on the
asking of the police and disown their presence at
the time of recovery of incriminating articles. In
such circumstances, absence of evidence from

local witnesses should not be blown too the
There is no warrant of law that evidence of the
members of the law enforcing agencies Mus,
have corroboration from other source.”

In the case of Mohinuddin vs State reported jp
61 DLR 35 it has been held that,

"There are quite a number of cases wher.
the local witnesses of search and seizure do no
support the police out of fear of the accused o;
of their men or on being gained over or for var.
ious other reasons and depose falsely in favou;
of accused to save the offender from legal pun.
ishment. Depending on the facts and circum.
stances of each case, a judge certainly may dis.
believe a witness of search and seizure if j
appears to him that he is deliberately making
obliging statements in favour of the accused
falsely in order to save him from legal punish.
ment."

32. Besides, as to the evidence of the Police
personnel, it has been held in Kashem vs State
reported in 54 DLR 212, that,

"The Court should not take too rigid a view
regarding the provisions of section 103 of the
Code. In the absence of any cogent reason to

‘ disbelieve the members of law-enforcing |
agency, the Court is competent to convict the |
accused relying on their testimony without cor-
roboration."

In the case of Rana Madbar vs State, reported |
in 5 DLR 499 it has been held that,

"Prosecution cannot be disbelieved merely
because of the fact that the seizure list witness-
es stated that the arms were not recovered in
their presence. Now, the question is, whether in
a case like this, evidence of the informant and
the Investigating Officer can be disbelieved or
not. Here, we have found that there is no sug-
gestion from the side of the defence that the
informant and the Investigating Officer PW 15
had any enmity with or grudge against the
accused persons for which they were falsely

            
implicated in this case. The only suggestion
given to the prosecution witness is that the
accused persons were falsely implicated by the
informant for his personal gain in his service."

We also consider it worthwhile to refer the decision
made in Mohinuddin vs State, reported in 67
to the effect that,

"Even if the seizure list witnesses do not
support the prosecution case, the conviction and
sentence under section 19A and 19(f) of the
Arms Act can be given solely on the testimonies
of the Police personnel.

Then in the Indian Jurisdiction, we find that the
2 of Naba Kumar vs State, 1974 CrLJ 572 (SC),
jt has been set at rest that,

“Even where the witnesses to a search do
not support the prosecution case of seizure of an
article during the search, there is nothing to pre-
vent the Court from acting on the sole testimo-
ny of the searching officer provided there is no
material discrepancy in the officer's description
of the articles seized by him."

We would also refer to Kamruzzaman vs State,
reported in 1995 BLD 486 = 47 DLR 416, noting by
this Court that,

"When the accused admits that he has arms
in his possession and arms are actually recov-
ered at his instance, provisions of sections 103
and 165, CrPC are of little relevance."

33. Now adverting to the decision cited by the
learned lawyer for the petitioner, we find that in the
case reported at 59 DLR 488, it has been recorded,
at paragraph 4 of the said decision that though the
prosecution case about recovery of the arms and
ammunition was from the dwelling house, but the
evidence proved that the arms and ammunition were
found outside the dwelling house, which is an open
place. Hence, the prosecution case was disbelieved
for cogent reasons in that case. In 50 DLR 356, the
incriminating articles were recovered from 

That was obviously a public place. But the
present case under consideration has no manner of
similitude with the facts and circumstances of the
cases cited from the defence side and, as such, the
decision of those two cases are not applicable in this
case. Now looking at the 40 DLR 493 case, we found
that, at para 6 of this decision, the learned Court noted
discrepancy in the statements of the two important
official witnesses on a vital point that rendered the
prosecution story very much doubtful. But in the
instant case we found no such discrepancy in the dep-
osition of the prosecution witnesses and, as such, we
are unable to accept the submission that the decision
of that case is applicable in this case.

34. The learned Advocate appearing for the
appellant has also strenuously argued about the
manner of examination of the accused under section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and submits
that the trial in question is vitiated for not comply-
ing with section 342 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure.

35. No doubt, the duty cast upon the trial Court
under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, about the examination of the accused, is
very vital, inasmuch as this section confers a valu-
able right in favour of an accused person if the
accused is owing to any infirmity in examining the
accused prejudiced under section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, then the trial becomes ques-
tionable. However, whether an accused is preju-
diced or not in the course of his examination, under
section 342 of the Code, cannot be determined by a
set rule and must necessarily depend on the fi
and circumstances of each case.

36. Accordingly, we having examined the
explanation made under section 342 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, and found that the evidence of
each witness had not been brought to the notice of
the accused separately, but the prosecution case, the
incriminating facts and circumstances as Well as the
articles and the manner of recovery, place of recovery


            
have been brought to the notice of the accused,
while recording that the accused along with his
learned lawyer was present all along when all the
PWs were examined in their presence, and that the
learned trial Court having examined him in this
background the accused was asked as to whether he
would plead guilty, and whether he would adduce
any evidence in support of the defence and if he had
anything more to say, But the accused pleaded not
guilty and he has declined to adduce any witness in
support of his case. He did not confess his guilt at
this stage. Now, considering the line of decisions of
the apex Court on this point, we have noticed the
prime consideration, on this point, is to see whether
the accused has in any way been prejudiced or not
for non compliance or improper compliance of the
provision of section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. We have already found that no sugges-
tion was made, nor any ground taken on this point in
the appeal. We are also aware that, the prosecution
should not depend upon the weakness or on any
omission on the part of the defence. Having exam-
ined the course of examination made under section
342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in this case,
we are of the considered view that no prejudice has
been caused to the accused in this case, in the course
of examination under section 342.

37. We, therefore, are of the considered view
that as an accused person cannot be convicted based
on mere suspicion or conjecture, so the benefit of
doubt cannot rest upon mere suspicion or conjec-
ture. It may not be out place to record the decision,
as a perpetual guidance for criminal trial, of the
Appellate Division, made in the case of State vs
Tayeb Ali, 1987 BLD (AD) 265 = 40 DLR (AD) 6,
wherein it has been held that "mere suspicion or
faint doubt in the mind of the judge is no ground to
give the accused benefit of doubt, unless it is a rea-
sonable doubt." We however, did not find even a
case of faint doubt in this case.

38. Duty of the Court is not only to see that no
innocent man should be punished, but also to ensure
that no person committing an offence should go
scot-free as held in the case of Krishna Mochil vs
State of Bihar 2002 SCC (Cri) 1220.

39. Before, parting with the case, we would
also like to record that, lack of certainty abou,
awarding punishment in the cases whe!
ly due, disregarding their status or identity, caused
by whatever reason, has been immensely contribu.
ing to the deterioration of the law and order situation
in our country, to nullify the deterrent effect of the
penal statutes and, more alarming, this has been
encouraging a good number of people to accept
committing crime as a rewarding business and
resorting to corruption as the easiest way to build
their fortune at the cost of lives, modesty and secu.
rity of the civilians, who are now at the verge of los.
ing trust in the institutions those which are duty
bound to bring the criminals to book. Besides, we
feel that, now is the time to review the criminal law,
at least to amend section 103 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898, to review the principle
that burden of proof never shifts in criminal cases,
specially in the cases of corruption, offences against
sexual violence, murder of women and children,
trafficking in arms, drug, narcotics, women and chil-
dren.

40. In view of the facts and circumstances of
the case and the discussion made above, we have
found that the prosecution has been able to prove its
case beyond reasonable doubt, hence we do not find
any illegality in the impugned judgment and order
passed by the learned trial Court. But, considering 
the age of the accused appellant we are inclined wo
modify the sentence, accordingly the sentence is 
modified to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 
years under section 19(A) and rigorous imprison-
ment for 7 years under section 19(f) of the Arms Act
and both the sentences will run concurrently and
would be counted from his date of arrest.

41. In the result, the appeal is allowed with
modification.

42. Send down the Lower Court Records 2!
once.

Communicate the order at once.



            
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Statutory Original Jurisdiction)
Md Abdur Rashid J
Md Miftahuddin
Choudhury J

Islam Enterprise...

Commissioner of Taxes,
Taxes Zone-3.......0eeeeer
Ssovenseescenraed Respondent*

Judgment
August 9th, 2007

jncome Tax Ordinance (XXXVI of 1984)
sections $3(2) & 173

The Appellate Tribunal did not take the pain
of reading the provisions of section 173 of the
Ordinance. When section 173 empowers the
Appellate Tribunal to amend his own order even
ofhis own motion when the mistakes are borne
out by the record, then what rules disentitle such
Income Tax Authority is not understood.

For the reasons aforesaid, the decisions of the
Appellate Tribunal upholding the disallowances, receipts
and debts as assessed by the Assistant Commissioner of
Taxes and refusing to exercise jurisdiction under section
173 of the Ordinance summarily cannot be sustained in
Bi ei RS Ta, SP eal (42 & 43)

Maharana Mills (Pvt) Ltd vs Income-Tax Officer,

Porbandar: (1959) ITR 350 (SC); Mahendra Mills Ltd vs
PB Desai, Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income-
Tax and another: (1975) ITR 135 (SC); Sh. Muhammad
Iftikhar-ul-Haq vs Income Tax Officer, Bahawalpur: 18
DLR (SC) 487; MS Inland Navigation Co. Ltd of
Chittagong vs Income Tax Officer, Companies Circle,
Chittagong: 19 DLR 871; Commissioner of Income-Tax
vs Khemchand Ramdas; (1938) 6 ITR 414 PC and
Venkatachalam vs Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing
Co, Ltd: (1958) 34 ITR 143 ref.

AB Siddique, Advocate—For the Applicant.

Sathika Hossain, Assistant Attorney-General—For
the Respondent.

Judgment
Md Abdur Rashid J: The above teference on

behalf of the applicants, who are proprietors of
“Reference Application Nos. 211 and 212 of 2002.

Islam Enterprise and Islam Builders, were presented
in similar facts and circumstances.

2. In Reference No. 211 of 2002, the appli-
cant submitted income tax return for the ment
year 1996-97 claiming a loss of Taka 1,03,600
Then, he submitted a revised return claiming a loss
of Taka 47,12,500. Subsequently, he submitted an
audited statement of accounts claiming income of
Taka 6,92,750. The Assistant Commissioner of
Taxes however estimated under section 83(2) of the
Income Tax Ordinance, 1984, in short, the
Ordinance, the total income at Taka 35,04,896 and
determined tax of Taka 8,50,724 payable thereon.

3. In Reference No. 212 of 2002 the same
applicant first submitted a return claiming a loss of
Taka 39,205 for the assessment year 1997-98. Then,
he submitted a revised return supported by audited
statements of accounts claiming income of Taka
2,26,250. But the Assistant Commissioner of Taxes
estimated under section 83(2) of the Ordinance the
total income at Taka 13,97,111 and determined tax
of Taka 3,15,000 thereon. Against the said assess-
ments, the applicant preferred two appeals before
Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes.

4. Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes
heard both the appeals together and by his order
dated 31-8-99 disposed of them with little modifica-
tions in respect of disallowances and receipts only.

5. Against said order of the Appellate Joint
Commissioner of Taxes, the applicant presented two
appeals before the Appellate Tribunal. The
Appellate Tribunal by its order dated 20-11-2000
dismissed the appeals and maintained the order of
the Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes. Then,
the applicant made an application under section 173
of the Ordinance for correction of errors in both the
assessments. But the Appellate Tribunal by its order
dated 10-6-2002 rejected the application on the view
that the applications were not maintainable.

6. In Reference No. 213 of 2002, the other
applicant submitted income tax return tor the asses-
ment year 1996-97 claiming a loss of Taka 98,250.
Then, he submitted a revised return claiming a loss


            
HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Statutory Original Jurisdiction)
Md Abdur Rashid J
Md Miftahuddin
Choudhury J

Islam Enterprise...

Commissioner of Taxes,
Taxes Zone-3.......0eeeeer
Ssovenseescenraed Respondent*

Judgment
August 9th, 2007

jncome Tax Ordinance (XXXVI of 1984)
sections $3(2) & 173

The Appellate Tribunal did not take the pain
of reading the provisions of section 173 of the
Ordinance. When section 173 empowers the
Appellate Tribunal to amend his own order even
ofhis own motion when the mistakes are borne
out by the record, then what rules disentitle such
Income Tax Authority is not understood.

For the reasons aforesaid, the decisions of the
Appellate Tribunal upholding the disallowances, receipts
and debts as assessed by the Assistant Commissioner of
Taxes and refusing to exercise jurisdiction under section
173 of the Ordinance summarily cannot be sustained in
Bi ei RS Ta, SP eal (42 & 43)

Maharana Mills (Pvt) Ltd vs Income-Tax Officer,

Porbandar: (1959) ITR 350 (SC); Mahendra Mills Ltd vs
PB Desai, Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income-
Tax and another: (1975) ITR 135 (SC); Sh. Muhammad
Iftikhar-ul-Haq vs Income Tax Officer, Bahawalpur: 18
DLR (SC) 487; MS Inland Navigation Co. Ltd of
Chittagong vs Income Tax Officer, Companies Circle,
Chittagong: 19 DLR 871; Commissioner of Income-Tax
vs Khemchand Ramdas; (1938) 6 ITR 414 PC and
Venkatachalam vs Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing
Co, Ltd: (1958) 34 ITR 143 ref.

AB Siddique, Advocate—For the Applicant.

Sathika Hossain, Assistant Attorney-General—For
the Respondent.

Judgment
Md Abdur Rashid J: The above teference on

behalf of the applicants, who are proprietors of
“Reference Application Nos. 211 and 212 of 2002.

Islam Enterprise and Islam Builders, were presented
in similar facts and circumstances.

2. In Reference No. 211 of 2002, the appli-
cant submitted income tax return for the ment
year 1996-97 claiming a loss of Taka 1,03,600
Then, he submitted a revised return claiming a loss
of Taka 47,12,500. Subsequently, he submitted an
audited statement of accounts claiming income of
Taka 6,92,750. The Assistant Commissioner of
Taxes however estimated under section 83(2) of the
Income Tax Ordinance, 1984, in short, the
Ordinance, the total income at Taka 35,04,896 and
determined tax of Taka 8,50,724 payable thereon.

3. In Reference No. 212 of 2002 the same
applicant first submitted a return claiming a loss of
Taka 39,205 for the assessment year 1997-98. Then,
he submitted a revised return supported by audited
statements of accounts claiming income of Taka
2,26,250. But the Assistant Commissioner of Taxes
estimated under section 83(2) of the Ordinance the
total income at Taka 13,97,111 and determined tax
of Taka 3,15,000 thereon. Against the said assess-
ments, the applicant preferred two appeals before
Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes.

4. Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes
heard both the appeals together and by his order
dated 31-8-99 disposed of them with little modifica-
tions in respect of disallowances and receipts only.

5. Against said order of the Appellate Joint
Commissioner of Taxes, the applicant presented two
appeals before the Appellate Tribunal. The
Appellate Tribunal by its order dated 20-11-2000
dismissed the appeals and maintained the order of
the Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes. Then,
the applicant made an application under section 173
of the Ordinance for correction of errors in both the
assessments. But the Appellate Tribunal by its order
dated 10-6-2002 rejected the application on the view
that the applications were not maintainable.

6. In Reference No. 213 of 2002, the other
applicant submitted income tax return tor the asses-
ment year 1996-97 claiming a loss of Taka 98,250.
Then, he submitted a revised return claiming a loss


            
of Taka 3,14,100. Then, on 17-6-98 he submitted
further revised return supported by an audited state-

ment of accounts claiming income of Taka 3,70,685.
The Ass “ommissioner of Taxes however, esti-
mated under section §3(2) of the Ordinance the total

income at Taka 38,84,853 and determined taxes of
Taka 6,81,136 payable thereon.

7. In Reference No. 214 of 2002, the same
applicant first submitted income tax return for the
assessment year 1997-98 claiming a loss of Taka
4,11,501. Then, he submitted a revised return sup-
ported by audited statements of accounts claiming
income of Taka 1,85,500. But the Assistant
Commissioner of Taxes estimated under section
83(2) of the Ordinance the total income at Taka
15,04,500 and determined tax of Taka 3,42,625
payable thereon.

8. Against the said assessments, the applicant
preferred two appeals before the Appellate Joint
Commissioner of Taxes.

9. Both the appeals were heard together and
disposed of by one order dated 31-8-99. Learned
Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes disposed of
said appeals with little modifications in respect of
the disallowances and receipts only.

10. The applicant then preferred two appeals
before the Appellate Tribunal against said appellate
order. The Appellate Tribunal heard them together
and dismissed both of them by its order dated 20-11-
2001 and maintained the order of the Appellate Joint
Commissioner of Taxes. Then the applicant made
applications under section 173 of the Ordinance for
correction of the errors in such order. The Appellate
Tribunal rejected both the applications by its order
dated 10-6-02 on the same view that the applications
were not maintainable.

11. In the circumstances, the following com-
mon questions of law were referred to this Division
for determination:

(a) Whether on the facts and in the circum-
stances of the case the Appellate Tribunal
was justified in confirming the order of the

Appellate Joint Commissioner of Tax.
without assigning any cogent reasons f,
rejection of the books of accounts? ;
Whether the Appellate Trit
fied in law in confirming
from the profit and loss account +
pinpointing any specific defect?


Whether the Appellate Tribunal was just;
fied in law to estimate the receipts o
construction business in spite of the fac;
that the receipts were supported by pz
ment certificates from paying autho:
which reconciled with the bank statements
and books of accounts which were duly
audited by chartered accountants?

(d) Whether the Appellate Tribunal was justi-
fied in not correcting the mistakes as appar-
ent from record under section 173 of the

Ordinance?

12. Mr AB Siddique, learned Advocate for the
applicants, challenged the rejection of a part of the
receipts out of construction business which were
supported by the payment certificates issued by the
Tespective paying authorities and bank statements
and accounts statements duly audited by chartered
accountants and the Appellate Tribunal erred in law
in maintaining such wrong assessment of receipts.

13. He submitted that when the receipts in all
the cases were proved by sufficient evidence, the
Assistant Commissioner of Taxes had no authority
to reject a part of said receipts and enhanced the
receipts on some extraneous considerations which
had no basis to raise the rate of gross profit and the
Appellate Tribunal erred in law in maintaining such
erroneous assessments.

14. He also submitted that the Assistant
Commissioner of Taxes acted illegally in disallow-
ing substantial part of the justified expenses just 0
surmises and/or conjectures.

15. In Reference No. 212 of 2002 he also sub-
mitted that the rejection of an amount of Taka
2,50,000 by the Deputy Commissioner of Taxes out


            
of the debt of Taka 16,42,374 which were supported
by audited accounts and in Reference No, 214 of
vo the Deputy Commissioner of Taxes disal-
jowed Taka 150,000 out of the debt of Taka
60,08.796 without any basis. Both the learned
Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes as well as

16. We have perused the applications along
in the orders of the income tax authorities. In
ce No. 211 of 2002, in the profit and loss
jsut we find the Assistant Commissioner of
wes disallowed expenses of Taka 19,08,195 out of
5 649 claimed and in Reference No. 212
(2002 expenses of Taka 8,38,821 out of Taka
104 claimed. In Reference No. 213 of 2002
stant Commissioner of Taxes disallowed
expenses of Taka 8,84,318 out of Taka 26,28,723
and in Reference No. 214 of 2002 expenses of Taka
634,592 out of Taka 20,48,104 claimed.

17. We have examined the disallowances in all
the four references, item by item. Main reasons for
disallowance in respect of major items are stated to
be want of proof or verifiability, etc.

18. It is now settled that as an assessee is
obliged to prove each and every item of expense
claimed as and when he is called upon to and simi-
larly, the Income Tax Officer is not bound to accept
such expenses unless he is satisfied on the basis of
proof. Equally, in case of disallowance of any
expense, an Income Tax Officer is obliged to give
clear reasons for disallowance of each and every
item of expenses claimed. Moreover, when a sub-
stantial part of the expenses claimed could not be
accepted, the income tax officer shall afford an
Opportunity to the assessee to explain and/or to pro-
duce evidence in support of such expenses. He has
NO jurisdiction to disallow any expense just on sur-
mises and/or conjectures at his sweet wish, in lump.

19. In Reference No. 211 of 2002 the applicant
declared receipts of Taka 2,79,16,385 and gross
profit of Taka 53,04,112 at the rate of 18.99%. The

Assistant Commissioner of Taxes rejected said
receipts and enhanced the receipts to Taka
3,15,00,000 by adding Taka 9,95,888 just to raise
the rate of gross profit to 20%,

20. In Reference No. 212 of 2002 the applicant
declared total receipts of Taka 1,30,76,203 and gross
profit of Taka 25,23,100 at the rate of 19.29%. The
Assistant Commissioner of Taxes rejected said
receipts and enhanced the receipts to Taka
1,31,76,203 by adding Taka 96,900 to raise the rate
of gross profit to 20%.

21. In Reference No. 213 of 2002 the applicant
declared receipts of Taka 1,75,39,687 and gross
profit of Taka 33,70,150 at the rate of 19.21%. The
Assistant Commissioner of Taxes rejected such
receipts and enhanced the receipts to Taka
3,00,000,00 by adding 26,29,850 to raise the rate of
gross profit to 20%.

22. In Reference No. 214 of 2002 the applicant
declared receipts of Taka 100,16,999 and gross prof-
it of Taka 19,01,000 at the rate of 18.47%. The
Assistant Commissioner of Taxes rejected said
receipts and enhanced the amount of receipts to
Taka 1,23,50,000 by adding Taka 5,69,000 to raise
the rate of gross profit to 20%.

23. Appellate Joint Commissioner of Taxes
modified the receipts and directed the Deputy
Commissioner of Taxes to estimate the receipts at
Taka 3,00,00,000 in place of Taka 3,15,00,000 in
Reference No. 211 of 2002; Taka 2,75,00,000 in
place of 3,00,000,00 in Reference No. 213 of 2002;
and Taka 1,20,00,000 in place of Taka 1,23,50,000
in Reference No. 214 of 2002 but did not interfere
with the estimate of receipts in Reference No, 212 of
2002. He directed the Deputy Commissioner of
Taxes to add the difference between declared rate of
gross profits and estimated rate of gross profits of
20% to the total income. The Appellate Tribunal
maintained the orders of the Appellate Joint
Commissioner regarding receipts and gross profits
without any modifications.

24. Both the applicants are contractors and
engaged in the Government and statutory bodies. In


            
support of the receipts, they submitted certificates of
payments from such bodies and bank statements
evidencing the receipts.

25. The Assistant Commissioner of Taxes
found them but could not accept the entire receipts
on the ground that those were not verifiable in their
entirety. He was also of the view that the rate of
gross profit was shown to be less. But how the rate
of gross profit could be the same every year and
what was the basis for such expectation were not
furnished. Moreover, it was submitted that no
opportunity was ever afforded to the applicants to
explain the receipts before such enhancements were
made.

26. Itisa fact of life that no one, particularly in
such business of construction, could be expected to
eam at the same rate of profit every year. Change or
fluctuation in the rate of profit cannot be ruled out.
When the receipts are found to be supported by the
certificates of payments and the bank statements,
enhancement of such receipts without any materials
or basis or inquiry cannot be justified and must be
held to be arbitrary.

27. Appellate authorities therefore, failed to
discharge the jurisdiction vested in them in not tak-
ing into consideration of the proof or materials pro-
duced by the applicants in support of the receipts.
Disposal of appeals by the appellate authorities
without any application of mind to the grounds
taken appears to be now endemic and making such
right to appeal meaningless. No amount of depreca-
tion expressed by this Division could have brought
any impact in the mindset of such appellate authori-
ties.

28. With regard to the claim of the debt on
account of purchase of materials, we find in
Reference No, 212 of 2002 the applicant claimed a
debt of Taka 16,42,374 and in Reference No. 214 of
2004 of Taka 6,68,796. The Assistant Commissioner
of Taxes found existence of said debts audited. But
he rejected Taka 2,50,000 and Taka 1,50,000
respectively out of said debts for being not verifi-
able only. When the major part of the debts was

believed then why a small part of such debts Could
not be believed is not really understood. He has Lot
no authority to reject any part of the debt in lump at
his sweet wish, In the absence of any basis, Such
rejection of a small part of the debts and addition oy
that amount to the income therefore, cannot be
accepted.

29. The Assistant Commissioner of Taxes is
empowered to ask for proof of the debts claimed ang
to reject a part of the debts which could not be
proved but he is not empowered to accept or rejecy
the debts just on the basis of surmises and/or con.
jectures, at his sweet will. The Appellate Tribuna|
hopelessly failed in maintaining such addition jp
reckless disposal of the appeals without any appli.
cation of mind.

30. Mr AB Siddique, learned Advocate,
pressed hard against rejection of the applications
made under section 173 of the Ordinance for cor.
rection of the impugned order by the Appellate
Tribunal. He submitted that the Appellate Tribunal
failed to exercise the jurisdiction vested in it for cor-
rection of the errors apparent on the face of the
record. In support, Mr AB Siddique cited following
decisions, Maharana Mills (Pvt) Ltd vs Income-Tax
Officer, Porbandar: (1959) ITR 350 (SC):
Mahendra Mills Ltd vs PB Desai, Appellate
Assistant Commissioner of Income-Tax and anoth-
er: (1975) ITR 135 (SC); Sh. Muhammad Iftikhar-
ul-Haq vs Income Tax Officer, Bahawalpur: 18 DLR
(SC) 487 and MS Inland Navigation Co. Ltd of
Chittagong vs Income Tax Officer, Companies
Circle, Chittagong: 19 DLR 871.

31. All the aforesaid authorities are on section
35 of the Income Tax Act, 1922, which appear to be
in para material with section 173 of the Ordinance.

32. Sub-section 1 of section 173 of the
Ordinance, which is only relevant for our purpose,
reads as follows:

"Any income tax authority or the Appellate

Tribunal may by order in writing, amend any

order passed by it so as to correct any error
apparent from the record either of its own

            
motion or on the error having been brought to
its notice by the assessee or any other income
tax authority and all the provisions of this
Ordinance as may be applicable shall have
effect accordingly" (underlined by us)

33. The provisions of section 173 are not diffi-
cult 0 understand. It empowers any Income Tax
quhority or the Appellate Tribunal to amend any
oer passed by it by way of correction of any error
apparent from the record. However, no amendment
under sub-section (1) shall be made after the expira-
tion of four years from the date of order sought to be
amended.

34. Scope of section 35 of the Income-tax Act,
1922 was exhaustively dealt with in the case of
Maharana Mills (Private) Ltd: 1959 ITR 350 SC by
the Supreme Court of India.

Itheld, inter alia, that —

"The power under section 35 is no doubt,
limited to rectification of mistakes which are
apparent from the record. A mistake contem-
plated by this section is not one which is to be
discovered as a result of an argument but it is
open to the income tax officer to examine the
record including the evidence and if he discov-
ers any mistake he is entitled to rectify the error
provided that if the result is enhancement of
assessment or reducing the refund, then notice
has to be given to the assessee and he should be

allowed a reasonable opportunity of being
heard."

35. In the decision, earlier construction put on
the key words "mistake apparent from the record" in
the case of the Commissioner of Income-Tax vs
Khemchand Ramdas: (1938) 6 ITR 414 PC and
Venkatachalam vs Bombay Dyeing and
Manufacturing Co. Ltd: (1958) 34 1TR 143 was fol-
lowed.

36. In the case of Mahendra Mills Ltd vs PB
Desai, Appellate Assistant Commissioner of
Jncome-Tax, and another, the following view in said
Maharana Mills was profitably adopted.

"The words used in the section are 'appar-
ent from the record’ and the record does not
mean only the order of assessment but it con-
templates all proceedings on which the assess-
ment order is based and the Income-Tax Officer
is entitled for the purpose of exercising his
jurisdiction under section 35 to look into the
whole evidence and the law applicable to ascer-
tain whether there was an error. If he doubts the
written down value of the previous year it is
open to him to check up the previous calcula-
tions and if he finds any mistake it is open to
him to make fresh calculations in accordance
with the law applicable including the rules
made thereunder."

37. In the case of Sh. Muhammad Iftikar-ul-
Haq vs Income Tax Officer, Bahawalpur; the
Supreme Court of Pakistan also adopted aforesaid
case of Maharana Mills Lid.

It held that—

"This section empowers an Income Tax
Officer at any time within four years from the
making of an assessment order, of his own
motion to rectify any mistake apparent from the
record’ with the condition that if the effect be to
enhance an assessment, notice should be given
to the assessee of the Income Tax Officers'
intention and a reasonable opportunity of being
heard should be allowed."

38. A Division Bench of this Division in the
case of Ms Inland Navigation Co Ltd vs Income Tax
Officer held that —

"it is perfectly clear that section 35 will
apply when a mistake is apparent from the
record and no new facts have to be ascertained
by further enquiry and the matters on the record
are sufficient for the purpose of rectification of
the mistake."

39. There is generally no dispute that once an
assessment is made, it cannot be reopened by the
Income Tax Officer of his own motion or at the
direction of any authority higher to him except in

            
the circumstances indicated in section 173 of the
Ordinance.

40. On the aforesaid authorities, provisions of
section 173 do not leave any doubt to say that any
Income Tax Officer including the Appellate Tribunal
may order in writing to amend any order passed by
him to correct any error apparent from the record
either of its own motion or when the error has been
brought to him by the assessee or other Income Tax
Authority. Only condition is that no such amend-
ment could be made after the expiry of four years of
the order. The error or mistake must be borne out by
the record, not based on arguments. No fresh fact or
mistake beyond the record could be amended or
extraneous material. Section 173 requires the
authority to examine the record on the basis of the
application if any made by an assessee or any
Income Tax Authority.

41. In the case at hand, applications made were
self-explanatory. Mistakes were mentioned that in
spite of adequate proof of the receipts, the Assistant
Commissioner of Taxes rejected a part of the
receipts without any basis and without giving any
Opportunity to the assessee to explain. The
Appellate Tribunal maintained the order without any
reason whatsoever on the following view,
it covers a wide range that calls for
revision of the order dated 20-11-2001 passed
by the learned Tribunal which is not covered by
the Taxes Appellate Tribunal Rules. The appli-
cation filed by the assessee is therefore, not
maintainable. We, would, therefore, reject the
applications as being not entertainable as per
law."

42. We failed to understand the view. It
appears that the Appellate Tribunal did not take the
pain in reading the provisions of section 173 of the
Ordinance. When section 173 empowers the
Appellate Tribunal to amend his own order even of
his own motion when the mistakes are borne out by
the record, then what rules disentitle such Income
Tax Authority is not understood.

43. For the reasons aforesaid, the decisions of
the Appellate Tribunal upholding the disallowance,
receipts and debts as assessed by the Assistant
Commissioner of Taxes and refusing to exercise
jurisdiction under section 173 of the Ordinance,
summarily cannot be sustained in law.

44. In the result, the references are returneg
with our answer to the questions relating to
enhancement of the receipts and rejecting summarj.
ly the applications under section 173 of the
Ordinance in the negative and against the revenue
and in favour of the applicants.
No costs.



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Special Original Jurisdiction)
ABM Khairul Haque J| Jamil Akhter Elahi (Md)...
Md Mamtazuddin
Ahmed J vs
Judgment Government of Bangladesh
June 24th, 2009 | and others....Respondents*

.-Petitioner

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102

Sonali Bank Limited was nationalised
Government bank under PO 26 of 1972. Of late,
it was incorporated as a banking corporation
under the provisions of the Companies Act.
1994—Since its entire shares are held by the
Government, the Bank still retains the character
of a public authority for all practical purposes
and in that view, this writ petition is maintain-
able.

Md Jamil Akhter Elahi, Advocate (in person)—
Petitioner.

AKM Nazrul Islam with Ali Mustafa Khan and Md

Al-Mamun, Advocates—For the Respondent Nos. ? to 4.

*Writ Petition No, 4071 of 2009,

            
Judgment
ABM Khairul Haque J: This is an application
under Article 102 of the Constitution of the People's
Republic of Bangladesh, challenging the legality of
the Head Office circular No. 43 dated 24-5-2009,

issued by the respondent Nos. 4 and 5, approving ,

the car loan facilities to the executives of the respon-
dent Sonali Bank Limited,

2. Itis stated in the petition that the Board of

Directors of the Sonali Bank Limited, in its 82nd
foard meeting held on 12-5-2009, approved the car
joan facilities for the executives of the bank having
ihe rank of Assistant General Manager (AGM) and
wpwards.

3. The petitioner is not only an Advocate of
the Supreme Court but it is submitted, he is also a
philanthropist and takes interest in the affairs of the
State. As such, being aggrieved, by the above deci-
sion of the Board of Directors of the Sonali Bank, he
filed this writ petition and this Court by its order
dated 4-6-2009, issued a rule under Article 102 of
the Constitution of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh, upon the respondents in the following
manner:

"Let a Rule Nisi be issued calling upon the
respondents to show cause as to why the
impugned G47 Sree ZeweRIA Ae 43 dated 24-5.
2009 issued by the respondents Nos. 4 and 5
approving the car loan facility for the executives
of the respondents bank (as reproduced under
paragraph No. 5 of the writ petition) should not
be declared to have been issued without lawful
authority and is of no legal effect and/or such
other or further order or orders passed as to this

Court may seem fit and proper.

The Rule is made returnable within 2(two)
weeks from date,

In the meantime, Jet the operation of the
impugned 44 @rdtery Zewera Ae 89 dated 24-
5-2009 issued by the respondent Nos. 4 and 5
approving the car loan facility for the execu-
tives of the respondent bank be stayed for a
period of I(one) month from date.

He 9

Let the Rule be heard and disposed of
along with Writ Petition No, 2249 and 3277 of
2009.

Let it be fixed for hearing on 23-6-2009,
Requisites be put in at once."

4. The respondent No. 4 contested the Rule
by filing an affidavit-in-opposition sworn on 21-6-
2009, supplementary affidavit sworn on 23-6-2009,
denying all material allegations contained in the
petition.

5. Mr Md Jamil Akhter Elahi, the petitioner
himself, argues the case in person while Mr AKM
Nazrul Islam, Advocate, appears on behalf of the
respondent Nos. 2 to 4.

6. Mr Md Jamil Akhter Elahi, Advocate (in
person) submits, firstly, that this is a clear case of
discrimination. Since all the employees are not enti-
tled to this loan but it is only a privilege for the sen-
ior executives of the Bank who are so entitled to the
huge amount of car loan to the extent of Taka
13,00,000 and 12,00,000 without any interest. On
top of it, he submits, they are also entitled to Taka
30,000 per month by way of maintenance. This, he
submits, is nothing but spending away the funds of
Sonali Bank Limited, a fully sponsored Government
company.

7. When we asked about his own grievance in
this regard, the petitioner submits that as a conscious
citizen of this country and since the Sonali Bank
Limited for all practical purposes a Government
bank, he has got interest in the affairs of the bank
itself. On merit, he submits that when there is, sep-
arate loan facilities for the employees of the bank to
purchase car, house building, flat, motor-cyle ete. at
a low interest level but there is no such loan facili-
ties in this country to a particular class of executives
in this manner. That besides, over and above, there
isa further provision for payment of Taka 30,000 by
way of maintenance for the car which has got no jus-
tification either in equity or in law. He submits that
the Senior Executives can always purchase their
cars by availing normal loan facilities with low


            
interest rate as enjoyed by all the other employees of
the bank to whom this special privilege is not avail-
able.

8. Mr AKM Nazrul Islam, the learned
Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent
Nos, 2-4, submits that although all the shares of the
Sonali Bank Limited are held by the Government
but for all practical purposes it is now incorporated
as a banking corporation in pursuance of the deci-
sion of the Government to facilitate and expand its
banking business on sound commercial basis and
also to widen its area of operation, as such, this writ
petition is not maintainable on that ground,

9. Secondly, he submits that since the Sonali
Bank Limited is now being run more on business
and commercial consideration than as Government
institution as it used to be earlier, it has to stream-
line its expenditure on actual costing. Referring to
the comparative picture of expenditure as explained
in Annexure-4, he submits that each of the Senior
Executives, starting from the level of Assistant
General Manager and upwards, are entitled to full-
time car facilities. Such car facilities include depre-
ciation on the car, all kinds of taxes, fees and insur-
ance on it, the cost of maintaining a driver with his
salary, bonus, pension and other incidental benefits.
The total cost on post audit comes to Taka 9,87,058
per car per year. But under the new scheme, even
allowing an interest free loan and also maintenance
allowance, the total cost per car comes to Taka
4,15,050 as such, on actual costing, the bank is
going to save Taka 5,72,008 per car per year which
comes to 57.95%.

10. Mr Islam further submits that the above
noted calculation as explained in details in the
annexed comparative picture of expenditure
(Annexure-4) has been thoroughly examined by the
Ministry of Finance and only on their approval this
scheme was approved by the Board of Directors of
the bank, headed by Mr Ali Imam Majumder, former
Cabinet Secretary as its Chairman. The other mem-
bers of the Board of Directors are also very senior
Officials of the Government.

11. The learned Advocate further submits that
the management of the business of the bank is Vest.
ed on its Board of Directors and the members Of the
Board meticulously evaluated the concerned
scheme. Besides, it was again thoroughly scruti-
nised by the Government. Only thereafter, the
Board of Directors on consideration of the pros and
cons of the scheme, weighing its advantages and
disadvantages, approved it in the overall interest of
the bank, as such, he prays that this Rule is liable to
be discharged.

12. Mr Elahi when asked, fails to dispute the
authenticity of the comparative table of expenditure
(Annexure-4) and as explained by Mr Nazrul Islam
above.

13. On the question of discrimination, Mr
Nazrul Islam, Advocate, submits that since the exec.
utives below the rank of Assistant General Manager,
do not enjoy full-time car facilities, the question of
discrimination does arise but the other employees
are still entitled to normal car-loan facilities,
besides, they will also come within the scheme
when they would be promoted.

14. We have heard the learned Advocates of
both the sides and also perused the petition, the affi-
davit-in-opposition and also the supplementary afti-
davit-in-opposition annexing the comparative pic-
ture of expenditure (Annexure-4).

15. Admittedly the Sonali Bank Limited was a
nationalised Government bank under PO 26 of 1972
but of late, it was incorporated as a banking corpo-
ration under the provisions of the Companies Act.
1994. Since its entire shares are held by the
Government, we are of the opinion that the Sonali
Bank Limited still retains the character of a public
authority for all practical purposes and, in that view
of the matter, this writ petition is maintainable.

16. It appears that as a bank, it provides vari-
ous kinds of loans to all, on its terms and conditions.
It has also special loan facilities for all of its
employees in a reduced rate of interest. Of late, a
new scheme to provide car-loans to its senior exec-

            
tives has been introduced but without any interest,
Jt also allows maintenance allowance for each car,
This loan is not for all: employees of the bank but
restricted only to the higher executives, such as,
Assistant’ General Manager, Deputy General
Manager, General Manager, Deputy Managing
Director and Managing Director. They are all enti-
led to full-time car facilities but not the others, as
soeh, the question of discrimination does not arise,
so far the other employees are concemed.

17. A comparative table of expenditure
(Annexure-4) has been filed. This shows that the
tank is much better-of in introducing the concerned
carloan scheme for the senior executives of the
tank. The petitioner fails to show otherwise. This
scheme was approved by the Board of Directors of
the bank on prior authorisation by the Government.

18. Mr Karunamoy Chakma, the learned
Deputy Attorney-General, appraises us that this
scheme has got the sanction of the Government.
Apparently, the Board of Directors of the bank, in
approving the scheme, acted within its scope of
authority. There is no allegation of mala fide. This
Court, under Article 102 of the Constitution cannot
oversee the functions of a bank being run on a com-
mercial consideration even if all its shares are held
by the Government. This is the duty of the Board of
Directors of the bank and its share-holders, the
Government.

19. There is no evidence on record that the
Board did not consider the scheme in its proper per-
spective. It is also stoutly asserted on behalf of the
bank that the scheme has been duly examined and
approved by the Government. The learned Deputy
Attomey-General supports that claim.

20. Under such circumstances, this writ peti-
tion is misconceived and the Rule is liable to be dis-
charged.

In the result, the Rule is discharged but without
any order as to cost.



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Criminal Miscellaneous Jurisdiciton)
Siddiqur Rahman Miah J | Shahnewaz Karim (Md).
Md Ataur Rahman Khan J Petitioner
Judgment
April 13th, 2009

Code of Criminal Procedure (V of 1498)
Section 516A

The Court is entitled to release the property

VS
State...Opposite Party*

in the Jimma of the claimant to save the same
from gradual damage being exposed to sun and
rain, The petitioner claiming to take the same in
his jimma is bound by the bond to produce the
same in Court on and when directed by the
Court.

Sarwar Ahmed with Md Ziauddin, Advocates—For
the Petitioner,

Shakila Rawshan, Deputy Attorney-General with SM
Shahjahan Kabir, Assistant Attorney-General—For the
State Opposite Party.

Judgment

Siddiqur Rahman Miah J : This Rule on an
application filed under section 561A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure was issued upon the opposite
party against order No. 2 dated 26-10-2008 passed
by the learned Sessions Judge, Brahmanbaria in
Criminal Revision Case No.69 of 2008 rejecting the
prayer for taking of Jimma of the seized vehicle
namely Navana Taxi Cab No. Dhaka Metro Pa. I1-
2556 followed by the rejection order of the same
dated 10-7-2008 passed by the learned Additional
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Brahmanbaria in GR
Case No.668 of 2008 arising out of Brahmanbaria
Police Station Case No.30 dated 7-7-2008 under
section 25B(2) of the Special Powers Act, 1974.

2. The prosecution Case in short, is that one
Md, Nazir Hossain, Sub-Inspector of Police, in-
charge Champaknagar Police Camp, Brahmanbaria
Police on production arrested accused, Md Akkas

*Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.21114 of 2008.

            
Mia, with 300 bottles of Indian Phensidyl and
lodged an FIR on 7-7-2008 at 10-25 hours with
Brahmanbaria police station against 6 accused per-
sons including the arrested accused person alleging,
inter alia, that on 6-7-2008 at 20-30 hours while he
was checking vehicles at Champaknagar bazar, one
taxi cab reached there and out of doubt he gave sig-
nal to the driver of the taxi cab to halt but the driver
ignoring his signal along with the accused Nos. 2 to
5 fled away except the arrested accused Akkas Miah
who was arrested by the police and thereafter on
search of the taxi cab recovered 300 bottles of
Indian Phensidyl from inside of the taxi cab and
accordingly, a seizure list of the phensidyl, taxi cab
and a driving licence of the driver was prepared in
presence of local witnesses and a case under section
25B(2) of the Special Powers Act, 1974 bearing
Brahmanbaria Police Station Case No.30 dated 7-7-
2008 was started against the accused.

The instant case is still under investigation and
charge sheet is not yet submitted by the investigat-
ing officer. It is further stated that the owner of the
seized taxi cab bearing No. Dhaka Metro-Pa-11-
2556 is Navana Taxi Cab Company Ltd, 125/A
Motijheel Commercial Area, Dhaka and the peti-
tioner is Section Supervisor of the aforesaid compa-
ny who is authorised to settle the matter by the com-
pany vide authorisation letter dated 9-7-2008.

3. It is further stated that seized Taxi Cab of
the company of the petitioner has been registered
bearing No. Dhaka Metro PA-11-2556 with route
permission and fitness certificate and accordingly,
insured the vehicle with Pragati Insurance Ltd and
thereafter paying the taxes as per law,

4. It is further stated that the seized taxi cab
bearing No, Dhaka Metro Pa 11-2556 is now kept in
an open place outside Brahmanbaria Thana
Complex since its seizure and during the last rainy
season due to frequent rainfall, the seized taxi cab
was almost at the brink of total damage causing a
serious financial loss to its owner, so the petitioner
being authorised official of the Navana Taxi Cab
Company as owner filed an application to the

learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate.
Brahmanbaria for taking of jimma of the seized tax;
cab in his favour with a promise to resubmit q,,
same before the Court when called for to check tota)
damage to the cab and the learned Magistrate in his
order dated 10-7-2008 in GR case No.668 of 200g
rejected the prayer of the petitioner.

5. Thereafter the petitioner being aggrieye,
by the aforesaid order dated 10-7-2008 passed by
the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate
Brahmanbaria filed Criminal Revision No.69 of
2008 under section 439A read with section 435 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure for taking of Jimma
of the aforesaid seized Taxi Cab before the Court of
the learned Sessions Judge, Brahmanbaria who jin
his order dated 26-10-2008 rejected the prayer of the
petitioner.

6. Being aggrieved by the order dated 26-|().
2008, the petitioner filed this application under sec.
tion 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure ang
obtained the Rule.

7. Mr Sarwar Ahmed along with Mr
Ziauddin, the learned Advocate for the petitioner,
submits that the company of the petitioner leased
out its taxi to the accused petitioner on rental basis
and driver used to carry passengers from various
destinations; that the company of petitioner is the
real owner of the seized taxi cab and that the driver
of the taxi cab has no responsibility of the cab as he
was not a regular staff of the company. It is further
submitted that, the taxi cab is kept idle in an open
place and the cab is being destroyed causing a pecu-
niary loss; that after taking of jimma of the said taxi
cab if allowed by the Court and the same will be re-
produced before the Court concerned on the date
fixed when so asked for by the Court. In this view of
the matter, the impugned order is liable to be set aside
and the vehicle may be released on jimma in favour
of the petitioner for securing the ends of justice.

8. Mr Sarwar Ahmed, the learned Advocate of
the petitioner, cited the decision in the case of Abdul
Muntakim vs State reported in 12 BLT 19, the case
of Aziz Mollick vs State reported in /3 MLR 230 and

            
the case of Md Omar Ali vs Abdul Malek and the
ciate reported in 6 MLR 372 in support of his con-

gention.

9. Mr Shakila Rawshan, the leamed Deputy
Atomey-General appearing on behalf of the State,
ly concedes that the car may be given to the

castody of the petitioner on furnishing a proper jim-
enama with the undertaking to produce the same
jn the Court when called for.

10. Heard the submission of the learned
gvocates and perused the application and the
pes annexured therewith.

11. In course of hearing of this Rule, the peti-
tioner has filed papers in support of his claim but we
are not inclined to go into the merits of the matter
which, in our opinion, would prejudice the matter
since the case is under investigation. Section 516A
of the Code of Criminal Procedure enables a
Magistrate to provide for interim custody of proper-
ty, which reads as follows:

"S16A. When any property regarding
which any offence appears to have been com-
mitted, or which appears to have been used for
the commission of any offence is produced
before any criminal Court during any inquiry or
trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks
fit for the proper custody of such property pend-
ing the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and if
the property is subject to speedy or natural
decay, may, after recording such evidence as it
thinks necessary, order it to be sold, or other-
wise deposed of."

12. This power of the Magistrate is to make
order of temporary custody for the protection of the
Property produced before him regarding which an
offence appears to have been committed or which
appears to have been used for the commission of the
offence. Under this section, the Magistrate has no
power to investigate or to decide the ownership of
the rival claimants of the property. The only con-
sideration is of possession of the property at the time
of commission of the alleged offence has to be gone

into and decided before passing an order for the cus-
tody of the said property. Where the question is the
custody of property like taxi cab in the present case,
we are of the opinion that Magistrate instead of
entering into investigating the title of the taxi cab
claimant it is his duty to decide expeditiously who is
the person prima facie entitled to possession thereof
and hand over its possession to him for avoiding
great loss that has been sustained when it was kept
unused, for ensuring the taxi cab in the same condi-
tion as it was at the time of its seizure and to produce
it before the Court as and when required. We are
further of the opinion that, no property should be
given to a person who is not entitled to its posses-
sion at the time of its recovery and who has not com-
mitted any offence in respect thereof to make its
possession unlawful.

13. As observed above, we should at least see
as to who is the actual owner and possessor of the
taxi cab on the date of alleged occurrence. It
appears from the supplementary affidavit filed by
the petitioner that the taxi cab along with 69 other
taxi cabs was leased out to the Navana Taxi Cab
Company Ltd by the Industrial Promotion and
Development Company of Bangladesh Ltd (IPDCL)
which had issued a certificate to the Navana Taxi
Cab Company Ltd stating and certifying that the
Navana Taxi Cab Company was authorised to deal
with legal acts like insurance claim, police cases,
etc. as may be required for operation and mainte-
nance of vehicles on behalf of the IPDCL.

14. It further appears from the evidence on
record, that the company of the petitioner leased out
its taxi cab on rental basis to the accused driver to
carry passengers from one place to another keeping
the ownership with the company. Such practice of
leasing out a taxi cab to the driver is prevalent in our
society,

15, The learned Advocate for the petitioner has
shown us the blue book, road licence, etc. of the taxi
cab. Thus, it is clear from the above fact that the
petitioner company was the legal owner and posses-
sor at the time of seizure of the taxi cab.

            
16. There is no denying the fact, that the seized
taxi cab is being damaged for keeping the same idle
in an open place and is being destroyed causing
huge pecuniary loss. The trial of the case will not be
hampered if the taxi cab is given in the Jimma to its
original owner with condition to produce the same
before the Court as and when it will be required.

17. It is not known when the trial of the case
will be concluded. If the car is kept lying in the
police station for an indefinite period, there is every
chance of occasioning damage of it. So, to avoid it,
subject to order of disposal of the car after trial
under section 517 of the Code, the learned
Magistrate ought to have given the car in the cus-
tody of the petitioner under proper jimmanama.

18. On the above reasons, the order passed by
the learned Magistrate refusing to deliver the car to
the custody of the petitioner and the impugned
judgment and order of the learned Sessions Judge
passed in Criminal Revision No. 69 of 2008 being
illegal and abuse of the process of the Court must be
struck down and set aside.

19. In view of the above provisions of section
516A of the Code, the Court is entitled to release the
property in the Jimma of the claimant to save the
same from gradual damage being exposed to sun
and rain. The petitioner claiming to take the same in
his jimma is bound by the bond to produce the same
in Court on and when directed by the Court.

20. Having considered from above point of
view, we are of the opinion that the petitioner’s
prayer under section 516A of the Code deserves
consideration keeping in view of the safety of the
seized taxi cab in question.

21. We accordingly, find merit in the Rule.

22. In the result, the Rule is made absolute.
Impugned order No. 2 dated 26-10-2008 passed by
the learned Sessions Judge, Brahmanbaria in
Criminal Revision No. 69 of 2008 rejecting the
prayer for taking Jimma of the seized vehicle, name-
ly Navana Taxi Cab Dhaka Metro Pa-11-2556 fol-
lowed the rejection order of the same dated 10-7-

2008 passed by the learned Additional é
Judicial Magistrate, Brahmanbaria in GR Case No
668 of 2008 arising out of Brahmanbaria Policy
Station Case No. 30 dated 7-7-2008 under S€Ction
25B(2) of the Special Powers Act, 1974 is set aside

hiey

23. Petitioner Md Shahnewaz Karim 4,
allowed to take the seized Taxi Cab No. Dhak
Metro-Pa-11-2556 in his jimma furnishing adequay,
security bond to the satisfaction of the Addition,
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Brahmanbaria on furthe
undertaking to produce the same before the Court o,
and when directed by the same.

Copy be sent down at once.



HIGH COURT DIVISION
(Special Original Jurisdiction)

ABM Khairul Haque J| Bangladesh Italian Marble

ATM Fazle Kabir J | Works Ltd........ Petitioner
vs

Government of Bangla.

Judgment desh and others............

August 29th, 2005 |... secre Respondents*

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 142

From a plain reading of the meanings of the
words ‘amendment’ and ‘amended’, given by 1
number of authorities it is crystal clear that how-
ever wide meaning we give, the words ‘ratifica-
tion’, ‘confirmation’ appearing in the Sub-title of
the Paragraph 18 to the Fourth Schedule of
Constitution, would not come within the ambit of
the words ‘amendment’ or ‘amended’ in Article
142, Similarly, the words ‘ratified’, ‘confirmed’
and ‘validly’ appearing in the last portion of 4th
Paragraph 18 do not come any where near the
ambit of the provision of ‘Amendment of the
Constitution’ by any stretch of imagination.

*Writ Petition No. 6016 of 2000.

            
On lifting the veil of enactment we found that the
real purpose of the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act,
1979, was to ratify, confirm and validate the Martial Law
proclamations etc., by insertion of Paragraph 18 to the
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, but since it does not
come Within ambit of ‘amended’ or ‘amendment’ as envis-
aged in Article 142, the said Amendment was illegal and
sesee(651 & 655)

wid

Constitution Fourth Schedule

The insertion of Paragraph 18 is anything
but an amendment of the Constitution, rather,
this paragraph was thrust into the Fourth
Schedule in an effort to legalise what were the
most illegal activities of the usurpers and dicta-
tors who ruled Bangladesh during the period
from August 15, 1975 to April 9, 1979.

All those provisions were grossly illegal. This was
not, obviously, unknown to the rulers of the day. As such,
in their predicament, in order to hide their acts of violation
of the Constitution, they further disgraced the
Constitution by inserting Paragraph 18 to the Fourth
Schedule of the Constitution, and ratified, confirmed and
validated all those Proclamation etc, incorporating in the
said paragraph. This whole process of amendment was
engineered in order to hide the illegalities committed by
the dictators. If the relevant provisions are legal and ben-
eficial to the community, those need not be appended to
the Constitution, such provisions remain valid on its own
right, since those would be the expressions of the free will
of the sovereign people. Those need not require any con-
Stitutional protection. (652, 633, 654)

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 142

The then President and the Chief Martial
Law Administrator might be a very powerful and
a gifted person but he had no right or authority
under the Constitution, the supreme law, of the
land, to make any amendment of any law not to
speak of the Constitution. The additions made in

the said Article 142 by the Second Proclamation
No. IV of 1978, is invalid and ultra vires to the
Constitution, nay (658, 659)

Oath of Office

It should be noted that the oath of office, an
individual Judge takes at the time of his elevation
to the Bench, is a personal one and each individ-
ual Judge declares it taking upon himself, the
obligation to ‘preserve, protect and defend the
Constitution’. It is an obligation cast upon each
individual Judge. Each individual Judge himself
remains oath-bound to fulfil his own obligations
under the Constitution. This obligation under the
oath is personal and remains so upon him, every
day, every week, every month, every year, during
his tenure as a such Judge. His all other obliga-
tions are subject to his Oath and the Constitu-

tion.

We the Judges have got the obligation to uphold the
Constitution and we are oath-bound to do it, no matter
who is hurt. It is better to hurt a few than the country. In
any case everybody must face the truth however awkward
it may seem at first. But truth and only the truth must pre-
vail. We Judges are obliged to enhance the cause of justice
and truth and not to disgrace it, however political over-
tone it may seem to have but the Constitution, the supreme
law with the ever vigilant people of this country, shall
over-ride all political implications.

The constitutional process in Bangladesh remained
eclipsed till holding of the general election in 1991 but we
now have a parliamentary form of Government since the
said general election, as envisaged in the original
Constitution. But we reiterate what we said earlier that
what is wrong, what is illegal, what is perverse, shall
remain so for all time to come. Nothing can legalise the
illegal acts of the Martial Law Authorities perpetrated
since August 15, 1975. As such, it is best for the country
that we put our records correct, once for all. It is no use
keeping the skeleton in the cub-board. It was bound to

            
come out some day. It has come out now, exposing its cor-
rupt nature. It exposes its hollow and shallow ground on
which it stood. It also exposes the unbounded illegalities

committed by the usurpers and dictators. (669, 671 & 672)

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 142
Constitution (Sth Amendment) Act, 1979
Section 2
Fourth Schedule

But even at the time of revoking and repeal-
ing the Proclamations, MLRs and MLOs by the
Proclamation dated April 6, 1979, the Constitu-
tion was sought to be made subordinate to the
‘Orders’ of the President. We have no words to
deplore and deprecate such conduct. Thus, in the
garb of this seemingly innocent amendment, a
fraud had been committed upon the people of
Bangladesh and their Constitution.

The said Referendum Order and all other Proclama-
tions, MLRs and MLOs were ratified, confirmed and val-
idated and were made part of the Constitution by adding
paragraph 18 in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution
by virtue of Section 2 of the Constitution (Fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1979. As such, this amendment is a unique one
and it has no parallel any where in the civilized world.
Apparently, this was done only to hide illegal and uncon-
stitutional provisions and activities and also to bring those
under the blanket cover of the Constitution, the supreme
and most sacred instrument of the Republic of
Bangladesh.

The Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979, was
enacted for a collateral purpose and not for any benefit to
the people of Bangladesh or for enhancement of the pres-
tige of the Republic of Bangladesh or for further refine-
ment of the Constitution but only for ratification, confir-
mation and validation of illegal provisions and illegal
activities perpetrated by the illegal Martial Law
Authorities and for making all those part of the Consti-
tution as if the Fourth Schedule is dumping ground,

enonell (696, 697)

Constitution of Bangladesh, \972
Articles 48 & 142

It cannot be believed that Khandaker Mosh-
taque Ahmed, a Minister, Justice Sayem, the
Chief Justice of Bangladesh and Major General
Ziaur Rahman, BU pse., Chief of Army Staff gr
Bangladesh, did not know that under Article 4g
of the Constitution, they were not eligible t,
become the President of Bangladesh, still all gy
them, in defiance and violation of the Constity.
tion, seized the office of President, the highes
position in the Republic by force thereby appar.
ently all of them committed the offence of sed;
tion. (714

Articles 48 & 142

It cannot be believed that they were not
aware that the Constitution or the laws jp
Bangladesh do not provide for Martial Law or
the office of the Chief Martial Law Administra.
tor but they in violation of the Constitution mer-
rily assumed such position, and continued to
issue Proclamations of Martial Laws, Martial
Law Regulations and the Martial Law Orders as
if Bangladesh was a conquered country. ...... (715)

Article 102

Doctrine of Necessity—The doctrine of
necessity is not a normal rule but it is an excep-
tion to the normal rule, as such, can be called
upon only in an exceptional circumstances, it
order to remedy a lapse or illegality which could
not be settled in any other way but such a laps
or illegality must be remedied in the greater
interest of the State and its citizens but not (0
bestow benefit upon the usurpers and the dicta
tors. If the said doctrine is not invoked the inter:
est of the State as well as its citizens could be seri-
ously prejudiced and harmed only in such cir-
cumstances it can be invoked. In other words,
this doctrine can only invoked, when there is no

            
other way out and most certainly, not in a matter

of Course, ae (733)

In general, if a usurper wrecks the Constitution or
interferes With the normal legal order of the country, on

te very first opportunity such an usurper and his collabo-

tors should be suitably punished under the law. But this

nds on the awareness of the people of their rights.

Nothing normally can be done, in the Third world coun-
pes even if the people at large and their country suffers
pause of the illegal activities of the usurpers. However,
ithe existence of the national fabrics are threatened then
nly then the doctrine of necessity can be invoked as

(734)

last resort.

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102

This kind of nomination in the Office of
President is unheard of. Even nomination to the
office of President (or Chairman) of a mere local
union council is not permissible but it was made
possible in the highest office of the Republic of
Bangladesh. It was done in violation of the
Constitution of Bangladesh, and as such, it was
illegal, void ab initio and non-est in the eye of law.

Article 102

Since he assumed the office of President in
violation of the Constitution and since the
Martial Law Proclamations and MLRs and
MLOs were made in violation of the Constitution
and the Army Act or any other law prevalent at
the relevant period of time, those Proclamations
etc. were all illegal, void and non-est in the eye of
Haws! 0 rete se SHe  pEoTheae (771)

Article 150

Article 150 of the Constitution is only to pro-
tect various provisions, functions of different
functionaries and all other actions taken since

the declaration of independence and till the com-
HC 10

mencement of the Constitution. As such, the pur-
pose of Article 150 is limited apparently only for
that period and for a specific purpose. ......(491)

Article 150 is certainly not meant to be abused by the
usurpers for post facto legalization of their
gitimate activities which were beyond the ambit of the
Constitution. As a matter of fact, realizing that all the
Martial Law Proclamations etc. were un-constitutional,
they sought to make those legal by incorporating those
provisions as part of the Constitution. But the Fourth
Schedule is not meant for dumping ground for illegal pro-
visions. Rather, what is wrong and illegal remains so for
all time to come. Besides, no one can take advantage of

gal and ille-

hisown wrongs, teal (495)

Code of Civil Procedure (v of 1908)
Section 11

Res judicata—It appears that the legality of
either the Martial Law Proclamations or that of
the Fifth Amendment was not finally decided in
the Order summarily rejecting the Writ Petition
No. 802 of 1994. Such summary rejection does
not debar challenging of those provisions in a
subsequently filed writ petition, on the principle
of res judicata, since no such issue had been
raised therein or heard and finally decided by the
said Court. The sine qua non for application of
the principle of res judicata is the finality of a
de n in an earlier action. Since no rule was
issued in the Writ Petition No. 802 of 1994, the
summary order passed in the said writ petition in
the absence of the respondents therein, do not
operate as res judicata in the present writ peti-
fiom, gk lg yk cece (307)

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 142

The Parliament can enact any law but sub-
ject to the provisions of the Constitution. The
Parliament can also amend any provision of the
Constitution but thereby cannot change its basic
character,


            
Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102

During the period of Martial Law, the people
of Bangladesh was governed not according to
their Constitution through their elected repre-
sent: s in the House of Nation, but by the
Proclamations, MLRs, MLOs ete. and ruled by
the Major Generals, Colonels etc. To the
Bangalee people it mattered little whether they
were under the subjugation of the British or the
Pakistanies or even the Bangalees. Since they
were not governed by their own consent, through
their own representatives, they were not free and
independent and the Government which kept the
people of Bangladesh under subjugation, in vio-
lation of the Constitution, was out and out an
illegal one and shall remain so for all time to
aaqene come.                         ........................        (577)

This kind of illegal Government cannot be
legitimized by invoking Kelsen’s theory as was
done by the Supreme Court of Pakistan in
Dosso’s case and was rightly overruled in Asma
Jilani’s case.

It may be noted that even the Privy Council
did not approve the Kelson’s theory in
Madzimbamuto vs Lardner-Burke (1968) 3 All ER
SOle shure ay vanadate sso ago Tere (578, 579)

Khandker Ehteshamuddin Ahmed vs Bangladesh 33
DLR (AD) 154; Nasiruddin vs Bangladesh 32 DLR (AD)
216; State vs Haji Joynal Abedin reported in 32 DLR
(AD) 110; State vs Dosso 11 DLR (SC) 1; Begum Nusrat
Bhutto vs Chief of Army Staff and the Federation of
Pakistan PLD 1977 (SC) 657; Asma Jilani vs Government
of Punjab PLD 1972 SC 139; R vs Electricity Comrs, ex
P London Electricity Joint Committee Co (1920) Ltd.
(1924) 1 KB 171, (1923) All ER Rep 150; Yick Wo vs
Peter Hopkins(1885) 118 US 356 (book 30 Law Ed)
(370); Fazlur Quader Chowdhury vs Md Abdul Haque
PLD 1963 SC 486 = 18 DLR (SC) 69; Golak Nath vs

State of Punjab AIR 1967 SC 1643; Income Tax
Commissioners vs Pemsel (1891) AC 531; Powell Vs
Kempton Park Racecourse Company (1897) QB 242 Ca;
London County Council vs Bermondsey Bioscope
Company Ltd. (1911) IKB 445; Kesavananda Bharati vs
State of Kerala AIR 1973 SC 1461; Anwar Hossain
Chowdhury etc, vs Bangladesh 1989 BLD (Spl) 1 = 4;
DLR (AD) 165; Md Shoib vs Bangladesh 27 DLR 315.
Kudrat-e-Elahi Panir vs Bangladesh 44 DLR (AD) 319:
AT Mridha vs State 25 DLR 335; Tilonko vs Attorney.
General of Natal (1907) AC 93; Luther vs Borden 7 How
1 (1849); Raymond vs Thomas 91 US 712; Mitchell vs
Harmony 13 How 115; Liyanage vs R (1967) | AC 259 =
(1966) 1 All ER 650; Downes vs Bidwell 182 US 244,
288; Mormon Church vs United States (1890) 136 US |;
Dred Scott vs Sandford (1857); Dorr vs United States
(1904) 195 US 138 = 49 L. ED. 128; Ullman vs United
States (1956), 350 US 422 = 100 L Ed 511; Duncan
(1891), 139 US 449, 461 = 35 L. Ed. 219; Lesser vs
Palmer (1920); Shankari Prasad Singh Deo vs Union of
India AIR 1951 SC 458; Md Abdul Haque vs Fazlul
Quader Chowdhury PLD 1963 Dhaka 669 = 15 DLR 355
Sajjan Singh vs State of Rajasthan AIR 1965 SC 845;
Basheshar Nath vs CIT AIR 1959 SC 149; Indira Nehru
Gandhi vs Shri Raj Narayan AIR 1975 SC 2299; Minerva
Mills Ltd vs Union of India AIR 1980 SC 1789; Subhesh
Sharma vs Union of India AIR 1991 SC 631; Marbury vs
Madison, (1803) 1 Cranch 137; SR Bommai vs Union of
India AIR 1994 SC 1918; Halima Khatun vs Bangladesh
30 DLR (SC) 207; B Prabhakar Rao vs State of AP, AIR
1986 SC 210; Toronto Electric Commissioners vs Snider
1925 AC 396 PC; roprietary Articles Trade Association vs
Attorney-General of Canada 1931 All ER 277 PC; Grace
Brothers Proprietary Limited vs Commonwealth (1946)
72 CLR 269; Frederick Walz vs Tax Commission of New

York 25 L Ed 2d 697 (397 US 664) (1970); Motor Genera!

Traders vs State of Andhra Pradesh AIR 1984 SC 121: S

Krishnan vs State of Madras AIR 1951 SC 301; State of

West Bengal vs Anwar Ali, AIR 1952 SC 75; Basheshar

Nath vs Commissioner of Income-tax, Delhi and


            
Rajasthan AIR 1959 SC 149; Sajjan Singh's AIR 1965 SC
g48); Madzimbamuto vs Lardner-Burke (1968) 3 Al ER
<6}; Bowen vs Gilliard 483 US $87 = 97L Ed 2d
4881987); Bachan Singh vs Punjab AIR 1982 SC 1325;
suit VS Zia-ur-Rahman PLD 1973 SC 49; Pakala
eayana Swami vs Emperor AIR 1939 PC 47; Federation
~f Pakistan vs Moulvi Tamizuddin Khan PLD 1955 FC
poe? DLR (FC) 291 ref.

Ajmalul Hossain, QC with ABM Siddiqur Rahman
and Nighat Sultana Nabi, Advocates—For the

xe

Fida M Kamal, Additional Attorney-General and
uM Mushfigur Rahman, Deputy Attorney-Generall—

¢ Respondent No.1.
None —For the Respondent No. 2.

Athter Imam with Syed Mamun Mahbub and Jinnat
Ali, Advocates—or the Respondent No.3.

Dr Rafiqur Rahman, Advocate—Amicus-Curiae.

Part I
Background History

ABM Khairul Haque J : This case has a long and
a chequered history. One Pak Italian Marble Works
Limited, a private limited company, registered with
the Joint Stock Companies of the erstwhile East
Pakistan, became owner of the premises at holding
No. 11, Wise Ghat, Police Station, Kotwali, Dhaka,
in 1962. The said company, on taking loans from
Industrial Development Bank, constructed a cinema
hall known as Moon Cinema Hall in 1964. After lib-
eration of Bangladesh, some people taking advan-
tage of poor law and order situation prevailing at
that time, took forcible possession of the said cine-
ma hall in or about the last week of December, 1971,
from the staff of the company.

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102
'''''
2. Subsequently, by a notification being
Notification No. 186-SI dated December 31, 1971,
published in Bangladesh Gazette Extra-Ordinary on
January 3, 1972, the Management of the Moon

Cinema House was taken over with effect from the
said date of notification, by the Ministry of
Industries and it was made over to the Management
Board, purportedly in pursuance of the Acting
President’s Order No. Sec XI/1M/35/71/17 dated
December 30, 1971 (Annexure-E). In the meantime,
under order of the Department of Trade and Com-
merce, Government of Bangladesh, the name of the
company was changed to Bangladesh Italian Marble
Works Ltd. by an order dated 28-11-1972, passed by
the Registrar, Joint Stock Companies, Bangladesh
(Annexure-A). This company is the petitioner No.1,
while the Petitioner No. 2 is its Managing Director.
The Moon Cinema hall is an asset of the petitioner-
company.

3. By a notification being Notification No.
IM-XV-36/72/531 dated 15-12-1972, published in
Bangladesh Gazette on 4-1-1973, the Moon
Cinema, among others, were placed under the dis-
posal of Bangladesh (Freedom Fighters) Welfare
Trust, the respondent No.3, in exercise of the pow-
ers under Article 5 of the President's Order No.16 of
1972 (Annexure-F).

4. Earlier the petitioner No. 2 filed an appli-
cation on April 28, 1972, praying for release of his
property, namely, the Moon Mansion at 11, Wise
Ghat Road. In due course, the Sub-Divisional
Officer (South), Dhaka, by his order dated I-12-
1972, directed an enquiry. The Directors of the com-
pany personally appeared before the Officer-in-
charge of the Abandoned Property Cell on 22-10-
1973 .  The enquiry report dated 11-9-1974 in the
order-sheet (Annexure-G), show that the concerned
property was not an abandoned property. The SDO
also examined the documents and by his order dated
18-12-1974 placed it before the Deputy Commis-
sioner. The Additional Deputy Commissioner, by his
Memo dated 6-1-1975 (Annexure-G-1) to the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, recom-
mended release of the said property. But by the
Memo dated 27-6-1975 (Annexure-G-2), the
Ministry of Industries, Government of Bangladesh,
the respondent No.1, informed the petitioner No.2
that the property is an abandoned property and as

            
such, cannot be released. The petitioner No.2, how-
ever, filed another application onl 7-12-1975, before
the Member, Advisory Council, in charge, Ministry
of Planning and Industries, praying for release of the
property (Annexure-H) but without any response.

5. As such, finding no other alternative, the
petitioners filed a writ petition being Writ Petition
No. 67 of 1976, praying for declaration that the noti-
fication dated 31-12-1971 of the Government of
Bangladesh, taking over certain properties as aban-
doned property under the Acting President's Order
No. 1 of 1971 and their subsequent Order dated 27-
6-1975, refusing to release the property under sec-
tion 15 of the President’s Order No. 16 of 1972, was
illegal and without lawful authority. Although the
Government of Bangladesh and the Secretary,
Ministry of Industries, the respondent nos. 1 and 2,
contested the Rule by filing an affidavit in opposi-
tion but the respondent No.3 did not. After hearing,
the High Court Division, by its Judgment dated 15-
6-1977 (Annexure-I) declared the impugned notifi-
cation of the respondents, taking over the Cinema
house in question as an abandoned property, as ille-
gal and directed handing over the vacant possession
of the property to the petitioner at once.

6. In due course, the Ministry of Industries,
the respondent No.1, in compliance of the Judgment
and Order passed by the High Court Division, by a
Notification being No. ND/(N-1)/4(2)/72/11 Dacca
dated 24-8-1977, deleted the Moon Cinema, 11,
Wiseghat Road, Dhaka, from the list published in
the Notification dated 31-12-1971 and the notifica-
tion dated 15-12-1972 . The cinema hall was also
formally released in favour of the petitioner compa-
ny with a direction on the Secretary, respondent
No.3, to hand over the physical possession of the
said Moon Cinema Hall to its representative,
(Annexure-J). The said Notification dated 24-8-
1977 was also published in Bangladesh Gazette on
1-9-1977 (Annexure-J-1). In due course, a
Magistrate was also deputed to hand-over posses-
sion to the petitioners but the Chairman and the
Secretary of the Freedom Fighter Welfare Trust,
refused to give up possession of the property.

7. In the meantime, the respondent No3
filed a Civil Petition for Special Leave to Appeal
No.291 of 1977 before the Appellate Division ang
obtained an order of stay of the Judgment and orde,
dated 15-6-1977, passed by the High Court Division
in Writ Petition No.67 of 1976 . But during the pen.
dency of the said Civil Petition, Martial Lay
Regulation No. VII of 1977, was promulgated on 7.
10-1977 . On 20-1-1978, the Civil Petition fo,
Special Leave to Appeal was dismissed as not being
pressed. 

8. Thereafter, the petitioner No.2 made sey.
eral representations to respondents for making over
the possession of the Moon Cinema Hall in favour
of the petitioner-company but the respondents main.
tained that in view of the Martial Law Regulation
No. VII of 1977, the judgment and order of the High
Court Division in Writ Petition No.67 of 1976, is not
binding upon them and they were not legally bound
to deliver possession of the said Cinema Hall. In the
contempt proceedings also the respondents took the
plea that because of the promulgation of MLR
No.VII of 1977 on 7-10-1977, the Judgment in Writ |
Petition No.67 of 1976 stood annulled and ceased to
have any effect. and the property in question
remained vested in the Government. Ultimately, at
the hearing of the contempt Rules on 4-4-1994, the
petitioner No.1 did not press those which were
accordingly discharged.

9. Thereafter, the petitioners moved another
writ petition being Writ Petition No.802 of 1994,
praying for Rule Nisi upon the respondents to show
cause as to why they should not be directed to make
over possession of the Moon Cinema Hall, at 11.
Wise Ghat, Dhaka, in favour of the petitioners, in
pursuance to the Gazette Notification No. IND (M-
1)/4(2)/72/11 dated 24-8-1977, issued by the
respondent No.1 . The High Court Division referring
to the decision of the Appellate Division in the ca
of Anwar Hossain Chowdhury etc. vs Bangladesh
BLD 1989 (Spl) 1, rejected the said Writ Petition
summarily by its order dated 7-6-1994 (Annexure
K-1).


            
10. On appeal, the Civil Appeal No. 15 of
1997, was also dismissed by the Appellate Division
py its Judgment dated 14-7-1999 (Annexure-K),

Part ll
The Present Writ Petition
11. The present Writ Petition traced the his-
yoy leading to the enactment of the Fifth Amend-
t. I is stated in the petition that Khandaker
aque Ahmed took over all and full powers of
Government of the People’s Republic of

gingladesh by a proclamation dated August 20,

ind suspended the Constitution of the People’s
republic of Bangladesh with effect from August 15,

1975 and made the Constitution subservient to the
proclamation, Martial Law Regulations and Martial

aw Orders. After 82 days, the said Khandaker
Moshtaque Ahmed, handed over the office of Presi-
dent of Bangladesh, in favour of Mr Justice Abu
Sadat Mohammad Sayem, the Chief Justice of
Bangladesh. He upon entering the said office of
President on November 6, 1975, assumed the pow-
ers of Chief Martial Law Administrator and made
certain amendments in the proclamation dated
August 20,1975, by a Second Proclamation issued
on November 8, 1975 . In due course, by a Third
Proclamation issued on November 29, 1976, Mr
Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem handed, over
the Office of Martial Law Administrator in favour of
Major General Ziaur Rahman, BU psc., to exercise
all the powers of the Chief Martial Law Adminis-
trator. The Abandoned Properties (Supplementary
Provisions) Regulation, 1977 (Martial Law Regula-
tion No.VII of 1977) was promulgated on October,
5, 1977 by Major General Ziaur Rahman, BU, Chief
Martial Administrator. This was published in the
Bangladesh Gazette, Extraordinary on October7,
1977 (Annexure-L). The Proclamations (Amend-
ment) Order, 1977 (Proclamation Order No.1 of
1977) was promulgated on April 23, 1977 (Anne-
xure-L-1). This Proclamation, among others, insert-
ed paragraph 3A in the Fourth Schedule to the Cons-
titution. The said paragraph purported to validate the
Proclamations, all Martial Law Regultions, Martial

975

Law Orders and all other laws made during the peri-
od between August 15, 1975 and the date of revoca-
tion of the said Proclamations and the withdrawal of
Martial Law (both days inclusive). It is further stat-
ed in the petition that thereafter the Constitution
(Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979 (Act No.1 of 1979)
was enacted, The said Act inserted paragraph 14 in
the Fourth schedule to the Constitution. Paragraph
37 to 39 of the petition reads as follows:
<br>
“37 . Thereafter, by the Constitution (Fifth
Amendment) Act, 1997 (Act I of 1979) Para-
graph 18 was inserted in the 4th Schedule of the
Constitution under the rubric of “Ratification
and Confirmation” which ran as follows :
<br>
“18 . All Proclamations, Proclamation
Orders, Martial Law Regulations, Martial Law
orders and other laws made during the period
between the 15th August 1975, and the 9th
April 1979 (both days inclusive) all amend-
ments additions, modifications, substitutions
and omissions made in this Constitution during
the said period by any such Proclamation, all
orders made, acts and things done, and actions
and proceedings taken, or purported to have
been made, done or taken by any person or
authority during the said period in exercise of
the powers derived or purported to have been
derived from any such Proclamation, Martial
Law Regulation, Martial Law order or any
other law, or in execution of or in compliance
with any order made or sentence passed by any
Court, tribunal or authority in the exercise or
purported of such powers, are hereby ratitied
and confirmed and are declared to have been
validly made, done or taken and shall not be
called in question in or before any Court, tribu-
nal or authority on any whatsoever”,
<br>
38 . It is respectfully submitted that on
seizure of power, the Chief Martial Law
Administrator purportedly issued decrees
known as Proclamations of Martial Law “sub-
ordinating” or “suspending” the Constitution of
the Republic including all those Articles of the
Constitution which protect the rights of the


            
individuals and provide the guarantees neces-
sary for the maintenance of the rule of law, That
the Chief Martial Law Administrator had of
course no authority to nullify the Constitution;
that even in case of grave public danger the
President of the Republic under the Constitu-
tion in case of his satisfaction and subject to
Article 141A, could have suspended some
Constitutional guarantees but the Chief Martial
Law Administrator under the Proclamations
went even further than the President and the
Parliament were entitled to go under the
Constitution of the Republic, in that he purport-
edly subordinated or suspended the Constitu-
tion itself which cannot be subordinated or sus-
pended either by the President or the Parliament
even in a grave emergency,
<br>
39 . It is respectfully submitted that the
Parliament has/had no authority /power (Art
142) to “ratify” and “confirm” the act of “sub-
ordination” or “suspension” of the Constitution
with all those Articles which provide suprema-
cy of the Constitution, independence of judici-
ary and rule of law and other basic structures as
the Parliament has/had no power to subordinate
or to suspend the Constitution in any manner;
that it is respectfully submitted that when the
Parliament does not derive any authority under
Article 142 to act in derogation of the Cons-
titution, so it cannot “ratify” or “confirm” any
such “acts”, “deeds” or “actions” in derogation
of the Constitution; that the Parliament having
no such authority could not be said to have rat-
ified acts, deeds and actions of the Chief
Martial Law Administrator that go against the
supremacy of the Constitution, independence of
the judiciary, rule of law and other basic struc-
tures of the Constitution.”


12. This writ petition was moved on I1-12-

“Let a Rule Nisi be issued calling upon the
respondents to show cause as to why takin,
over the management of “M/s, Moon Cinema»
11, Wiseghat, Dhaka by/under Notification Ny,
186-51 dated 31st December, 1971 published ti
the Bangladesh Gazette, Extraordinary datey
3rd January, 1972 and its placement with res.
pondent No. 3 for management by Notification
No. 1M-XV-36/72/531 dated 15th December,
1972 published in the Bangladesh Gazette
Extraordinary dated 4th January, 1973 and all
subsequent actions, deeds and documents relat-
ing thereto should not be declared to have been
made without lawful authority and is of no legal
effect and to further show cause as to why pur-
ported “ratification and confirmation” of the
Abandoned Properties (supplementary Provi-
sions/Regulation, 1977 (Martial Law Regula-
tions No. VII of 1977 and Proclamations
(Amendment) Order, 1977 (Proclamation Order
No.1 of 1977) with regard to insertion of para-
graph 3A to the Fourth Schedule of the
Constitution by paragraph 18 of the Fourth
schedule of the Constitution of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh added by the Consti-
tution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979 (Act | of
1979) should not be declared to have been made
without lawful authority and is of no legal
effect and as to why the respondents should not
be directed to hand over “Moon Cinema”, 11 . |
Wiseghat Road, Dhaka with its assets and man-
agement to the petitioners or such other or fur-
ther order or orders passed as to this Court may
seem fit and proper.”
<br>


13. The Rule was opposed on behalf of the
Government of Bangladesh, respondent No.1 and
Bangladesh (Freedom Fighter) Welfare Trust, the
respondent No.3 by filing their respective affidavits
in opposition. The affidavit filed on behalf of the

2000 and the Rule was issued in the following respondent No.1 was sworn on 3-2-2002 denying all
terms: material allegations. The case of the respondent

            
No.1 have been stated, inter alia, in paragraphs 7
sal .
and 12 of the said affidavit read as follows:
<br>
“7 . That the statements made in paragraph
7,8, 9, 10 and 11 of Writ Petition are not true in
toto hence, denied. In reply to those statements
itis stated that property in question is an aban-
doned property, and none of the share holders of
the company except too were found present in
Bangladesh at the relevant time nor was any
body found to manage the property, namely the
Cinema Hall in the circumstances. In the cir-
cumstances the property was acquired under the
Acting President's Order of Bangladesh
(Taking over and Control and Management of
Industrial and commercial Concern order, 1972
(Acting President’s order No. 1 of 1972). Thus,
the Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh took over the control and manage-
ment of the property in question under the
Provision of the said acting President's Order 1
of 1972 in the interest of the Republic and sub-
sequently under President’s order No. 16 of
1972 and the said property automatically vested
in the Governmental subsequently it was placed
at the disposal of Bangladesh Freedom
Fighter's Welfare Trust, a statutory Corpora-
tion, Respondent No. 3 and the said Welfare
Trust is possessing and managing the same till
date.

12. That in reply to the statements made in
paragraph 31-44 of Writ Petition it is submitted
that as per paragraph 18 of the 4th schedule of
the Constitution all actions taken during the
martial law period were valid between the Sth
August and 9th April, 1979 and confirmed and
declared to have been made done or taken and
shall not be called in question in any Court,
Tribunal or authority on any ground whatsoev-
er.

Moreover, in the case of Khandker
Ehteshamuddin Ahmed vs Bangladesh 33 DLR
(AD) 154 whether decision of the Martial Law
Court was open to challenge in Writ Jurisdic-
tion of the High Court Division after lifting of

the Martial Law from the Country as Martial
Law as lifted on 6-4-1997 known as Sth
Amendment of the Constitution and observed
as follows:
<br>
“This Division has expressed the opinion
on that such decisions or orders passed by the
Martial Law Court of any authority under such
regulation during the Martial Law period are
protected from being challenged under the Writ
Jurisdiction of the High Court Division except
in case of want of jurisdiction or coram non
judice or malafide”.
<br>
“Tt may also be pointed out that with the
lifting of Martial Law the provision of para-
graph 6 of Article 3(A) of the Fourth Schedule
of Constitution which provides that revocation
of the proclamation or withdrawal of Martial
Law shall not revive or restore any right or priv-
ilege which was not existing at the time of such
revocation and withdrawal

In this respect their Lordships of the
Appellate Division in the case reported in
Nasiruddin vs Bangladesh 32 DLR (AD) 216
observed as follows:
<br>
“Apart from the general principles of law
which says that repeal does not review any
things under repealed enactment, in the 4th
schedule of the Constitution, Article 3A clause
(6) clearly provides that revocation of the said
proclamation and withdrawal of Martial Law
shall not review or restore any right or privilege
which was not existing at the time of such rev-
ocation and withdrawal. Thereafter, if prior to
the withdrawal of all proclamations and Martial
Law Regulations of 6-4-1979, any proceedings
had abated in terms of the provisions of MLR
VII of 1977 they cannot be revived.”

14. With regard to the Fifth Amendment of
the Constitution, it is stated in paragraph 13 of the
affidavit-in-opposition as follows:
<br>
“13 . In reply to the statements that 5th
Amendment of the Constitution (Act | of 1979)

            
ratifying the Martial Law Regulation No. VII of
1977 . destroyed the supremacy of the
Constitution which is a basic feature of the
Constitution. In Anwar Hossain Chowdhury vs
Bangladesh reported in 41 DLR (AD) 165
wherein Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed after
noticing that by Martial Law proclamation
order the constitution was badly mauled to
times, held that all these structural changes
were incorporated in and ratified by the
Constitution Fifth Amendment Act, 1979 and
observed as follows:
<br>
“In spite of these vital changes from 1975
by destroying some of the basic structures of
the constitution nobody challenged them in
Court after revival of the Constitution. Conse-
quently they were accepted by the people and
by their acquiescence have become part of the
Constitution, In the case of Golak Nath the
Indian Supreme Court found three past amend-
ments of their Constitution invalid on the
ground of alternation of the basic structures but
refrained from declaring them void in order to
prevent chaos in the national life and applied
the doctrine of prospective invalidation for the
future. In our case also, the past amendments
which were not challenged have become part of
the Constitution by general acquiescence. But
the fact that basic structures of the Constitution
were changed in the past cannot be and is not
accepted as a valid ground to answer the chal-
lenge to future amendment of this nature that is,
the impugned amendment may be challenged
on the ground that it has altered the basic struc-
tures of the Constitution.” In the case of Anwar
Hossain Chowdhury our Appellate Division
refused to consider past Amendments of the
Constitution which have destroyed its basic
structures. It is now too late in the day, delay of
about 20 (Twenty) years since the constitution
Fifth Amendment Act was passed, to challenge
the vires of the Constitution Sth Amendment
Act in view of the judgment of the Appellate
Division.”

15. The affidavit filed on behalf of the
respondent No.3, was sworn on 14-1-2002, denying
all material allegations. It is stated in paragraph 3
that the instant Writ Petition is barred by res judica.
ta as all the relevant issues raised in the petition haq
been finally and conclusively decided in the Writ
Petition No.802 of 1994 and Civil Appeal No.15 of
1997, that the petitioners suppressed the fact that
they filed a review petition in the Appellate Division
of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, being Ciyi
Review Petition No.6 of 2000 against the saiq
Judgment of the Appellate Division which was stil)
pending for disposal. The case of the respondent
No.3 has been narrated in paragraph 4, 6-8 as fol.
lows:
<br>
“4, That the statements made in paragraph
31 of the Petition are by way of submissions to
the Hon’ble Court but are misconceived and
erroneous submissions and hence liable to be
rejected. It is submitted that the Martial Law
Regulations, inter alia, and all orders made,
acts and thing done and actions and proceedings
taken or purported to have been made, done or
taken by any person or authority the period
from 15th August, 1975 and 9th April 1979 in
exercise of the powers derived or purported to
have been derived from any such Martial Law
Regulations or in execution of or in compliance
with any order made by any authority in the
exercise or purported exercise of such powers
are ratified and confirmed and are declared to |
have been validity made, done or taken and
shall not be called in question in or before any
Court, tribunal or authority on any ground
whatsoever, as per paragraph 18 of the Fourth
Schedule of the Constitution added by the
Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979 (Act
1 of 1979) section 2.”

16. Paragraph 6 highlighted the Martial Law
Jurisprudence in this manner:
<br>
“6, That the submissions made in para-
graph 38 of the Petition are also not tenable in
the light of the Martial Law Jurisprudence that
has emerged in the wake of two Martial Law

            
periods/regimes in the constitutional history of

Bangladesh, No Court including the Supreme

Court has any power to call in question in any

manner whatsoever or declare illegal or void

the proclamation or any Regulation or order and

it was held by the Supreme Court in Halima

Khatuns case reported in 30 DLR (SC) 207 that

there was a “total ouster of jurisdiction of this

Court” and the Appellate Division put the Cons-

titution in no uncertain terms as subservient to

the Proclamation: Under the Proclamation the

Constitution has lost its character as the
Supreme law of the Country”. State vs Haji
Joynal Abedin reported in 32 DLR (AD) 110 fol-
lowed the above view. In Khandker Ehtaesham-
uddin Ahamed'’s case reported in 33 DLR (AD)
154, the Appellate Division merely took note of
the theory of revolutionary legality (State vs
Dosso reported in 17 DLR (SC) | and the doc-
trine of state necessity (Begum Nusrat Bhutto vs
Chief of Army Staff and the Federation of
Pakistan reported in PLD 1977 (SC) 657, there
being no challenge to the imposition of Martial
Law in Bangladesh, and went on not only to
reiterate the subservience of the Constitution to
the Proclamation etc. for as long as Martial Law
of 1975 existed but also beyond, after the
Constitution was revived following the lifting
of Martial Law in view of paragraph 18 added
to the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution by
the Constitution (5th Amendment) Act, 1979, In
Nasir Uddin’s case reported in 32 DLR (AD)
216, the Appellate Division clarified their earli-
er decision made in Halima Khatun’s case as
follows “In Halima Khatun’s case, the decision
is that if any action of taking over or vesting of
@ property comes within the mischief of Martial
Law Regulation VII of 1977, any proceedings
seeking to challenge the taking over or vesting
of such property shall abate. The further obser-
vations that requires to be made is that abate-
ment of the proceedings will follow in such
cases, except where the taking over or vesting is
without jurisdiction or coram non judice or if it
is mala fide and, in such circumstances such

action or order is not protected under the said
Regulation, With this clarification in Halima
Khatun's case and in conformity of the wo
decision set out, is to be held that there cannot
be any question of abatement of any legal pro-
ceedings taken by an aggrieved person to pro-
tect his legal right or interest in the property
against which action has been taken or
order made which is without jurisdiction or
coram non judice or is malafide. Except
this narrow compass, the proceedings comi
within the mischief of MLR VII of 1977 s rll
abate.” It was clearly decided by the Appellate
Division in Civil Appeal No. 15 of 1997 that the
above decisions reported in 32 DLR (AD) 216
and 33 DLR (AD) 154 are not applicable or
attracted or relevant to the facts and circum-
stances of the present case.
<br>
7 . That the statements/submissions made in
paragraph 39 and 40 of the Petition are also not
tenable for the reasons stated hereinabove. It is
submitted that the basic and consistent trend of
decisions of the Supreme Court regarding the
subservience of the Constitution to the Martial
Law continues to be the dominant judicial view
and the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act
1979 (Act No.1 of 1979) giving a blanket cover
to Martial Law Proclamations, Regulations etc
did not improve matters even after the lifting of
Martial Law and restoration of the Constitution,
except for the aforesaid modifications.
<br>
8 . That the statements/ submissions made
in paragraphs 41 of the Petition are also not ten-
able for reasons stated hereinabove. It is reiter-
ated that actions taken under MLR No. VII of
1977 are protected by the Constitution (Fifth
Amendment) Act, 1979 (Act No. 11 of 1979)
and the Constitutional protection/coverage con-
tinues even after the withdrawal of Martial
Law, as per judicial pronouncements of the
Supreme Court of Bangladesh referred to here-
inabove. It is submitted that the vires of the said
Act No. | of 1979 is not under challenge in this
petition, if it is at all possible to challenge it


            
now after about 22 years and that also in case of
a past and closed transaction.”



17. It appears that the Rule in this matter was
issued on 11-12-2000 and it was ready for hearing as
regards service on 17-5-2001 . This matter was men-
tioned before this Bench on 11-5-2004 and was
taken up for hearing on 2-4-2005, but on the prayer
of Ms. Nighat Sultana Nabi, Advocate for the peti-
tioner, the hearing was adjourned for two days. The
case was heard in part on 4-4-2005 but was
adjourned till 25-4-2005 . At about that time we
ascertained that the Civil Review Petition No. 6 of
2000 pending before the Appellate Division, had
already been dismissed for default on 23-10-2002.
On 27-4-2005, the case was again heard in part but
was adjourned to 15-5-2005 . We also, on that occa-
sion, requested the leamed Attorney-General of
Bangladesh, to assist us since the matter involved
constitutional questions of utmost importance. On
23-5-2005, we heard the case at length but on the
prayers made on behalf of all the parties, the hearing
was again adjourned till 25-6-2005 . The hearing of
the case resumed on 17-7-2005 and continued for
several days. The arguments were concluded on 24-
7-2005.

18. Initially, Ms Nighat Sultana Nabi, Advo-
cate, appeared on behalf of the petitioners, there-
after, Mr Ajmalul Hossain, QC and Advocate,
appeared with Mr ABM Siddiqur Rahman Khan,
Advocate, on behalf of the petitioners. Mr Fida M.
Kamal, the Additional Attorney-General appeared
with Mr AHM Mushfiqur Rahman, Deputy
Attorney-General, on behalf of the Government of
Bangladesh, the respondent No. 1 and Mr Akhter
Imam, Advocate, appeared with Md. Kalim Ullah
Mazumder, Advocates, on behalf of Bangladesh
(Freedom Fighters) Welfare Trust, the respondent
No.3 . On our request, Dr Rafiqur Rahman,
Advocate, assisted us as amicus curiae.

Part VI
Arguments on Behalf of the Petitioners

19. Mr Ajmalul Hossain, the learned Adyo.
cate appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted
that the enquiry conducted as early as on 11-9-1974
found the property not an abandoned one (Anne.
xure-G series). The High Court Division in Wri,
Petition No. 67 of 1976 also found by its Judgmen;
dated 15-6-1976 (Annexure-I) that the property was
not an abandoned property. Accordingly, the
Government also formally released the property by
the notification dated 24-8-1977 (Annexures-J and
J-1) and directed the respondent No.3 to hand over
the physical possession of the case-property in
favour of the petitioners but was not complied with,
that in the meantime Martial Law Regulation VII of
1977 being promulgated, the said Judgment of the
High Court Division purported to be abated and on
that plea, the respondent No.3 refused to abide by
the directions of the High Court Division.

20. Tracing the history of the case since
1972, the learned Advocate submitted that earlier
the Writ Petition No. 802 of 1994 and the Civil
Appeal No. 15 of 1997 were dismissed mainly on
the ground that the Fifth Amendment of the Cons-
titution was not challenged in that Writ Petition, as
such, this time legality of the Martial Law
Proclamations, Martial Law Regulations and the
Martial Law Orders, its ratification, confirmation
and validation by the Constitution (Fifth Amend-
ment) Act and the legality of the Fifth Amendment,
all had been challenged mainly on the grounds inter
alia:
<br>
(I) On the murder of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, President of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, on
August 15, 1975, Khandaker Mush-
taque Ahmed in total violation of the
Constitution, illegally seized the office
of President of Bangladesh, as such, he
was an usurper.
<br>
(Il) He had no authority to function as the
President, as such, the Proclamation of

            

Martial Law on August 20, 1975, and
his tenure as the purported President
for $2(cighty-two) days was illegal.
<br>
 (iii)The assumption of office of a President
of Bangladesh by the then Chief Justice
of Bangladesh on November 6, 1975
and the assumption of powers of the
Chief Martial Law Administrator by
the Second Proclamation issued on
November 8, 1975 was in total disre-
gard of the Constitution.
<br>
(iv)Appointment of Major General Ziaur
Rahman, as the Chief Martial Adminis-
trator by the Third Proclamation issued
on November 29, 1976, was made,
beyond the ambit and in total disregard
of the Constitution.
<br>
(v)Appointment of Major General Ziaur
Rahman as the President of Bangladesh
on April 21, 1977, was made in viola-
tion and in total disregard of the
Constitution.
<br>
(vi)As such, all the Martial Law Proclama-
tions, Martial Law Regulations includ-
ing the Martial Law Regulation No. VII
of 1977 and the Martial Law Orders,
were made by the usurpers of the office
of President in violation and in total
disregard of the Constitution, as such,
illegal, void ab initio and nonest in the
eye of law,
<br>
(vii)Provision for amendment of the Cons-
titution is provided for in Article 142
and can only be done in the manner
provided therein but since the Fifth
Amendment validated all illegal acts of
the usurpers, under the clout of Martial
Law, not only changing the basic struc-
ture as well as the character of the
Constitution in its totality but rather,
uprooted the Constitution, it was no
amendment in the eye of law, but
destruction of the Constitution alto-

gether, as such, ultra vires to the Cons-
titution.

The learned Advocate cited a large number of
decisions from home and abroad in support of his
arguments.


21. Mr Fida M Kamal, the learned Additional
Attorney-General, Government of Bangladesh, did
not dispute the facts leading to the enlistment of the
property as an abandoned one, as found by the
learned Judges in their Judgment dated June 15,
1977, in the Writ Petition No. 67 of 1976 . He even
did not dispute the declaration given in that writ
petition and its subsequent release from the list of
the abandoned properties.

22. He submitted that on the promulgation of
The abandoned Properties (Supplementary Provi-
sions) Regulation, 1977 (MLR VII of 1977) on
October 7, 1977, the Judgment dated June 15, 1977,
passed by the High Court Division, stood annulled
and had no effect. It remained so annulled even after
lifting of the Martial Law on April 7, 1979, in view
of validation of all Martial Law Proclamations,
Martial Law Regulations and Martial Law Orders,
by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979.
In support of his such contentions, he relied on and
read extensively line by line and page by page, from
the book titled ‘Bangladesh Constitution: Trends
and Issues’ written by Justice Mustafa Kamal, for-
mer Chief Justice of Bangladesh. This book is a
compilation of the lectures given by Justice Mustafa
Kamal, delivered in the Kamini Kumar Dutta
Memorial Law Lecture in 1994 . At that time, his
Lordship was a Judge in the Appellate Division. The
summary of the initial arguments put forward by the
leamed Additional Attorney-General are as follows:

23. The Martial Law Proclamations, the
Martial Law Regulations, the Martial Law Orders
and other laws passed during the period trom
August 15, 1975 to April 9, 1979, were ratified, con-
firmed and declared to have been validly made, by

            
the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979, as
such, cannot now be re-opened,

24. When asked as to how the Fifth Amend-
ment could ratify the Martial Law Proclamations,
MLRs and MLOs when those not only suspended
the Constitution, the supreme law of the land, but
also admittedly it was made subservient to those
provisions, the learned Additional Attorney-
General, apathetically replied that since the
Parliament enacted the Amendment, those became
ratified, confirmed and valid.

25. When notice of the learned Additional
Attorney-General was brought to the argument that
those Proclamations, MLRs and MLOs not only
changed the basic character of the Constitution but
also defaced it beyond recognition and since the
Fifth Amendment admittedly ratified all those pro-
visions and thereby made those part of the Constitu-
tion, the Fifth Amendment itself is ultra vires to the
Constitution, he replied that the said Amendment
itself did not make any change or deface the
Constitution, it only ratified and confirmed the ear-
lier Proclamations etc. and the actions taken there-
on, as such, the Fifth Amendment was validly enact-
ed.

26. We also asked the learned Additional
Attorney-General as to the necessity of the
Proclamations of Martial Law and he replied that
because of the Fourth Amendment which changed
the basic structure of the Constitution, the First
Proclamation became necessary but when we
enquired whether there was any opposition against
the said amendment, he answered that 2 or 3 mem-
bers of Parliament opposed it. He, however, admit-
ted that there were 300(three hundred) members of
Parliament. We again asked as to whether the said
Fourth Amendment of the Constitution had ever
been challenged before any Court, he answered that
it was not to his knowledge.

27. We pointed out to the learned Additional
Attorney-General that if today some armed and
fanatic groups of persons, having a different kind of
political philosophy, in defiance and in violation of

our Constitution, conspire and attempt to Over-throw
the elected Government of our country and establish,
their own kind of government, would he support
such an abortive attempt, the learned Additional
Attorney-General promptly snapped ‘most certainly
not’. Then, we threw our next question ‘how could
you then support such a naked seizure of power,
with the collaboration of a group of serving and
retired army officers, by the Proclamation dated
August 20, 1975, which itself did not put forward
any such plea that the taking of such power was nec-
essary because of the enactment of the Fourth
Amendment, that obviously such a belated plea
raised now, is a product of afterthought, that besides,
since admittedly the Fourth Amendment, whatever
might be its merits or demerits, was enacted admit.
tedly by a overwhelming majority in the Parliament,
The learned Additional Attorney-General was with-
out any reply.

28. Next we enquired under what provision
of the Constitution, Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed
handed over the office of President of Bangladesh to
Justice Abu Sadat Mohammed Sayem, the then
Chief Justice of Bangladesh and the legality of the
Proclamation issued on November 8, 1975, dissolv-
ing the Parliament, among others, the learned
Additional Attorney-General, could only reply that
the said Proclamation and the actions taken under it,
were ratified by the Fifth Amendment.

29. Likewise, we enquired about the legality
of the assumption of the powers of Chief Martial
Law Administrator by Justice Sayem and thereafter
how by the Proclamation issued on November 29,
1976, he transferred such powers in favour of Major
General Ziaur Rahman, BU, psc and his subsequent
nomination as the President of Bangladesh, by a
Notification dated April 21, 1977, although at that
time, as the Chief of Army Staff, Major General
Ziaur Rahman BU., psc was a salaried officer under
the defence services of the Government of
Bangladesh.

30. We also enquired about the legality of the
Referendum Order, 1977 (Martial Law Order No. |
of 1977), for holding a referendum in respect of

            
Major General Ziaur Rahman BU, pse who might
pave his own interest in proving himself but what
interest of the people of Bangladesh was served in
spending money for the personal aggrandizement of
one person.

31. We further enquired under what provi-
gion of the Constitution Justice Sayem and Major
General Ziaur Rahman BU, psc, amended the
constitution of Bangladesh, from time to time,
which Charles I or even Lord General Oliver

camwell could not do without the Parliament.

32. In reply to these and many other queries,
the leamed Additional Attorney-General, could not
gow any provision in the Constitution or any law
made thereunder or even the Army Act, to justify
ay of the above noted proclamations, MLRs and
MLOs and many others but he again and again fell
back on the ratification of those provisions by the
Fifth Amendment as if the said Constitution (Fifth
Amendment) Act, 1979, held all the answers and
remedies in its bosom and no legal justification is
required about those Proclamations etc. made since
August 15, 1975 to April 9, 1979.

33. Mr Akhter Imam, the learned Advocate
appearing on behalf of Bangladesh (Freedom
Fighters) Welfare Trust, the respondent No. 3, did
not dispute or argue on the finding of facts in the
earlier Writ Petition No. 67 of 1976 . Rather, he
developed a new kind of jurisprudence which he
termed as Martial Law Jurisprudence in the back-
ground of two Martial Law regimes in our country.
He upheld the validity of the subservience of the
Constitution to the Martial Law Proclamations,
MLRs, MLOs and other Orders and actions taken
during the period from August 15, 1975 to April 9,
1979, as ratified by the Constitution (Fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1979 which were made part of the
Constitution by inserting paragraph 18 in the Fourth
Schedule to the Constitution, as in the case of the
Proclamations etc, the learned Advocate argued,
made during the period form March 24, 1982 to
1986, were validated by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1986,

34. When we pointed out that the legality of
Seventh Amendment is not the issue before us, the
learned Advocate contended that the said 5th
Amendment was made exactly for the same purpose
and in the same manner, the Fifth Amendment was
made, in order to ratify the Proclamations etc. made
during the relevant Martial Law periods which he
asserted, were the examples of his Martial Law
Jurisprudence. The learned Advocate vigorously
argued that since all the Proclamations etc. were rat-
ified and confirmed by the provisions of the Fifth
Amendment, the legality of those Proclamations etc.
cannot be challenged or called in question before
any Court including the Supreme Court, in any man-
ner, as spelt out therein.

35. Like the learned Additional Attorney-
General, Mr Akhter Imam, Advocate, relied on the
above noted book, namely, ‘Bangladesh Constitu-
tion: Trends and Issues’. He also read line by line
and page by page from the said book in support of
his various contentions.

36. The summary of the contentions raised
by Mr Akhter Imam, Advocate, are as follows:
<br>
(i) Since the Martial Law Proclamations,
MLRs and MLOs were ratified by the
Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act,
1979 and became part of the Constitution
as paragraph 18 of the Fourth Schedule
by the said Amendment, its legality and
those of the Proclamations etc. cannot be
called in question in the Supreme Court,
as spelt out therein.
<br>
(ii) The legality of the Proclamations etc.
cannot be challenged after a long lapse of
26 (twenty six) years, specially when the
rights of various parties were created
during this long period.
<br>
(iii) The present writ petition is barred by res
judicata,
We asked the learmed Advocate as to whether

the Constitution is the supreme law of this Republic.
He readily agreed but hastened to add that such

            
supremacy is subject to the Martial Law Proclama-
tions, Martial Law Regulations and Martial Law
Orders since those Proclamations ete. including its
supremacy over the Constitution was ratified and
confirmed by the Fifth Amendment. He also candid-
ly pointed out that since Fifth Amendment, inserting
paragraph 18 to the Fourth Schedule of the Consti-
tution, was enacted by the Parliament, its legality
cannot be challenged in this Court as spelt out
specifically therein and since this amendment can-
not be challenged, the legality of the various
Proclamations etc. issued since August 1975 to April
1979, cannot also be challenged.

37. We observed in this respect but not with
much surprise that both the learned Additional
Attorney-General and the learned Advocate for the
respondent no. 3, were careful to avoid answering
the questions on the legality of the Proclamations,
MLRs and MLOs, issued since August 1975 to April
1979, rather, both of them did their utmost to high-
light and uphold the Constitution (Fifth Amend-
ment) Act, 1979, as the justification for all those
Proclamations etc. We, however, examined the
legality not only of those Proclamations, MLRs and
MLOs made available to us by the learned Advo-
cates but also the Fifth Amendment itself which pur-
ported to legalise those Proclamations etc issued
between August 1975 to April 1979.


38. On our request, Dr Rafiqur Rahman,
Advocate, appeared in this case as amicus curiae.
The summary of his submissions are as follows:
<br>
(i) The Constitution is the supreme law of
the land and all Institutions and func-
tionaries of the Republic are its creatures
and all laws must conform _ not only to
the letters but also to the spirit of the
Constitution.
<br>
(ii) Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed had no
Constitutional or legal authority to
assume the Office of President of

Bangladesh on August 15, 1975 or to
issue a Proclamation on August 29,
1975,
<br>
(iii)Justice Sayem had no authority unde
Constitution to assume the office of
President and the powers of C
Martial Law Administrator.

<br>
(iv) Major General Ziaur Rahman BU, psc
had no authority under the Constituti
to assume the powers of the CMLA an:
subsequently to become the President.
<br>
(v) Supremacy of the Constitution is its basic
feature but the Proclamations, MLR:
and MLOs issued from time to time,
made the Constitution its subservient
and destroyed the said basic feature of
the Constitution, as such, the Parliament
which is itself a creation of the Constitu.
tion, cannot validly ratify those Procla-
mations etc. which destroyed the basic
feature of the Constitution.
<br>
(vi) Proper procedure was not followed as
envisaged in Article 142 of the Constitu-
tion, in enacting the Fifth Amendment.
<br>
(vii)A violation of the Constitution remains
invalid for all time to come without any
limitation and a wrongful act can perpet-
uate only further wrongs.
<br>
(viii) The plea of res-judicata is misconceived
since the Writ Petition No. 802 of 1994
was rejected summarily. Besides, admit-
tedly neither the Proclamations etc. nor
the Fifth Amendment of the Constitu-
tion, were challenged in the said Writ
Petition,
<br>
In reply to holding out the Fourth Amendment
as the justification for Proclamation of Martial Law
in Bangladesh, Dr Rahman said that Fourth
Amendment was made by a sovereign Parliament
with almost 100% per cent votes in its favour while
the Martial Law Proclamations etc., were made by
the usurpers and in total violation of the Constitution
tion, as such, the Martial Law Proclamations, MLRs
and: MLOs were out and out illegal and that there
cannot be any comparison between the Fourth
Amendment and the Proclamations.



39. We have heard the learned Advocates on
behalf of the petitioners, the respondent No.1, the
respondent No.3 and also the learned amicus curiae.
perused the petition and the affidavits-in-opposition
filed on behalf-of the respondents.

40. Before we commence our discussions,
we remind ourselves the 8th verse of Sura ‘Tin’ of
the Holy Quran :
<br>
“Is not God The Wisest of Judges?”

(Translation by A. Yusuf Ali Published By
Amana Corporation Maryland, USA).

We also remind ourselves the Oath of Office we
solemnly swear on our elevation to the Bench which
is as follows :

The English text is :
<br>
I ......... having been appoint-
ed Judge of the High Court Division of the -
Supreme Court do solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my
office according to law:

That will bear true faith and allegiance to
Bangladesh: 

That I will preserve, protect and defend the
Constitution and the laws of Bangladesh:

And that I will do right to all manner of
people according to law, without fear or favour,
affection or ill-will.”

(The underlinings are mine)

Besides, we remind ourselves paragraph 4 of
the pre-amble of the Constitution which reads as fol-
lows :

(The underlinings are mine)

Its English version is as follows :

“Affirming: that it_is our sacred duty. to
safeguard, protect and defend this Constitution
and to maintain its supremacy as the embodi-
ment of the will of the people of Bangladesh so
that we may prosper in freedom and may make
our full contribution towards international
peace and con-operation in keeping with the
progressive aspirations of mankind;”

(The underlinings are, mine)

We also remind ourselves the lofty. ideals
enshrined in Article 7 of the Constitution.

This Article is the. touch-stone. of our
Constitution as held in the case of AT Mridha.

Keeping these provisions in view, amongst oth-
ers, we would consider the case of the respective |
parties.



41. But first we would narrate in brief the
history leading to the liberation of Bangladesh,

42. The glory of independent Bengal faded
away and sank in the afternoon of June 23, 1757 at
Lakkhabag, a huge estate of mango garden near
Palassy, for the next 190 years, due to treachery and
betrayal of Mir Jafar Ali Khan, Commander-in-
Chief of Nabab Sirajuddoula. However, the British
Rule under the East India Company in Bengal and in
other parts of India were never free from troubles
and the Bengali rebels successfully fought many a
battles against the British forces during the Second
half of the 18th Century. The year of 1857 saw the
War of Independence of Sepoys which originated
from Bengal. However, Queen Victoria by a
Proclamation on November 1, 1858, made India a
part of the British Empire. The Indian National
Congress was established in 1885 at Bombay while
Muslim League was established in 1906 at Dhaka.

In 1930, Surza Sen formed Indian Republican Army
and raided the armoury at Chittagong.

43. In 1935, Government of India Act, creat-
ed 11 (eleven) Provinces and Princely States. It pro-
vided for governance of those provinces by the
elected representatives of the people. In 1937, in
accordance with the provisions of the Government
of India Act, 1935, AK Fazlul Haque became the
first Prime Minister of Bengal. On March 23, 1940,
he moved the famous Lahore Resolution for the
establishment of separate States for the Indian
Muslims. In 1943, Khawaja Nazimuddin became
the next Prime Minister of Bengal. In 1946, on
Pakistan Issue, under the leadership of Hossain
Shahid Suhrawardy, Muslim League secured 116
seats out of 119 and achieved a land-slide victory in
Bengal amongst all the provinces in India. In that
view of the matter, it can be said that it was the
Bengali Muslims who spear-headed and voted
Pakistan into existence for the entire Muslim popu-
lation of the Indian sub-continent, After obtaining
overwhelming majority, Hossain Shahid Suhra-
wardy became the last Prime Minister of undivided
Bengal in 1946,

44. In early 1947, HS Suhrawardy made a
proposal for an independent undivided Bengal
before Lord Mountbaten, the Viceroy of India. He
was supported by Abul Hashim and Sarat Chandra
Bose but were opposed by Mahatma Gandhi ang
Shayma Prashad Mukharjee. Mohammad Ali Jinnah
supported the idea of independent Bengal provided
it joined Pakistan. On the other hand, Jawharla|
Nehru also supported the idea provided it joined the
Indian Union, Ultimately it yielded nothing.

45. In the meantime, Indian Independence
Act, 1947 was enacted on July 18, 1947, creating
two independent Dominions, namely, Pakistan and
India but the dream for an independent Bengal faded
away in the euphoria of Pakistan.

46. The Dominion of Pakistan formally
came into existence on August 14, 1947 and
Mohammad Ali Jinnah was elected the first
President of the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan.
In his inaugural address on September 11, 1947, he
outlined the basic ideals on which the state of —
Pakistan was going to flourish. He said :
<br>
" The first observation that I would like
to make is this : You will no doubt agree with _
me that the first duty of a Government is to _
maintain law and order, so that the life, proper
ty and religious beliefs of its subjects are fully 
protected by the State. |

.... If you change your past and work 
together in a spirit that everyone of you, no mat
ter to what community he belongs, no matter 
what relations he had with you in the past, no
matter what is his colour, caste or creed, is first
second and the last a citizen of this state with equal
rights, priviledges and obligations, there will be
no end to the progress you will make.
You are free you are free to go to your 
temples, you are free to go to your mosques or
to any other places or whorship in this state of
Pakistan. YOU may belong to any religion or
caste or creed that has nothing to do with the
business of the state.


            
            Now, | think we should keep that in
front of us as our ideal and you will find that in
course of time Hindus would cease to be
Hindus and Muslims would cease to be
Muslims not in the religious sense, because
that is the personal faith of each individual but
in the political sense as citizens of the state.
co
but the dreams of the Bangalees were shattered
the history of Pakistan was writ with
place clique, deception and disappointment. Very
soon the Bangalees in East Pakistan discovered that
they are reduced into second class citizen. Creation
of Pakistan brought them only a change of ruler, for
all practical purposes, the East Pakistan became a
colony of West Pakistan. The process started with
the delay in framing the Constitution for Pakistan
alhough in India, Constitution was framed and
sdopted by their Constituent Assembly in November
26, 1949.


47. Ultimately when the draft Constitution
for Pakistan was ready for approval by the Cons-
tiuent Assembly in December, 1954, the
Constituent Assembly itself was dissolved by
Ghulam Muhammad, the Governor-General of
Pakistan.

48. Ghulam Muhammad was never a politi-
cian. He was a bureaucrat, a member of the Indian
Audits and Accounts Service. But like many if not
most, because of the creation of Pakistan, could rise
to become the Governor General of Pakistan but
only to destroy the fabrics of a new nation in con-
tradiction to its neighbouring Republic. It may
suprise many that Ghulam Muhammad was elected
as a member of the Constituent Assembly from the
quota of east Bengal in June 1948 and retained his
membership until July, 1953.

49.This is how the constitutional mishaps in
Pakistan since 1953 was viewed by Yaqub Ali J in
Asma Jilani vs Government of Punjab PLD 1972 SC
139 Page 212 and onwards: 

Pakistan was faced with innumerable dif-
ficulties from the very start. Firstly,.....
On the 11th September 1951, Khan Liaqat Ali
Khan, the first Prime Minister,............ was
assassinated. A tussle for grabbing power
among persons who held positions of advantage
in the Government thereupon ensued and under
its weight the foundation of the State started
quivering. Eventually, Mr Ghulam Muhammad,
an ex-Civil Servant,.who was.holding the port-
folio of Finance became the Governor-General
and. Khawaja Nazimuddin as Leader of the
majority party in the Constituent Assembly
assuined the Office of the Prime Minister.

In April 1953, Mr Ghulam Muhammad dis-
missed Khawaja Nazimuddin and _his Cabinet
although he commanded clear majority in the
Constituent Assembly and made. another.Civil
Servant Mr Muhammad Ali Bogra, Pakistan’s
Ambassador to the United States of America, as
the Prime Minister. Among others General
Muhammad Ayub Khan, Commander-in-Chief
of Pakistan Army, joined his Cabinet _as
Defence Minister, This was the first_constitu-
tional mishap of Pakistan as Governor- General
Mr: Ghulam Muhammad was only a constitu-
tional head. He had to act on the advice given to
him ‘by the Prime Minister and_under_the
Constitutional Instruments (Indian _Indepen-
dence Act, 1947, and the Government of India
Act, 1935) he had no legal authority to dismiss
the Prime Minister and assume to himself the
role of a sovereign. ...........20.06 06

By 1954, the’ draft’ of the Constitution
based on the Objectives Resolution had been
prepared with the assent of the leaders of the
various parties in the Constituent Assembly
when on the 24th October 1954, Mr Ghulam
Muhammad knowing full well that the drafi
Constitution was ready, by a Proclamation, dis-
solved the Constituent Assembly, and placed
armed guards outside the Assembly Hall. This
was the second great mishap of Pakistan. .

The order of the Governor-General was
challenged by Mailvi Tamizuddin Khan, Presi-
dent of the Constituent Assembly, in the Chief

            
            Court of Sind by a Writ Petition filed under sec-
tion 223-A of the Government of India Act,
1935, which was added by the Government of
India (Amendment) Act, 1954, passed by the
Constituent Assembly, on 16th July 1954 . It
empowered the High Courts to issue Writs of
mandamus, certiorari, quo warranto and habeas
corpus. The order _passed_by Mr Ghulam
Muhammad was challenged as unauthorised _by
the Indian Independence Act or the Government
of India Act, void and of no legal effect.

In defence of the Writ Petition, the
Governor-General and the Members of the
newly-constituted Cabinet, cited as respon-
dents, inter alia pleaded that the Chief Court of
Sind had _no jurisdiction to Issue a Writ under
the Government of India (Amendment) Act,
1954, as it had not received the assent of the
Governor General.

A Full Bench of the Chief Court overruled
the objection raised by the respondents and held
that the order dissolving the Constituent
Assembly was illegal and issued a Writ restrain-
ing the Governor-General, his newly appointed
Cabinet Ministers; their agents and servants
from implementing or otherwise giving effect
to the Proclamation of 24th October 1954, and
from interfering directly or indirectly with the
functions of the Constituent Assembly.

The Governor-General and his Ministers
thereupon filed an appeal in the Federal Court
being Constitutional Appeal 1 of 1955 reiterat-
ing the objection that the Government of India
(Amendment) Act, 1954, did not become a law
as it had not received the assent of the
Governor-General.

By a majority judgment delivered by
Muhammad Munir CJ the appeal was allowed
and the writ petition was dismissed on the find-
ing that since section 223A of the Government
of India Act under which .................. the
Chief Court of Sind issued the Writ had not
received such assent, it was not yet law and,
therefore, that Court had no jurisdiction to issue
the Writs. Cornelius J (as he then Was) differed
with this view and recorded a dissenting Judge
ment holding that neither the British sovereign
nor the Governor-General as such was a Part of
the Constituent Assembly. The assent Of the
Governor-General was, therefore, not Necessary
to give validity to the laws passed by the
Constituent Assembly. With great respect to the
learned Chief Justice the interpretation Placed
by him on sections 6 and 8 of the Indian
Independence Act, 1947, as a result of which
the appeal was allowed, is ex facie erroneous
though we do not propose to examine in detail
the reason given in the judgment. ............,,,

The question of the validity of section 2 of
the Emergency Powers Ordinance, 1955, came
up before the Court in the case of one Usif Pate|
(1) within a few days of the decision in Maulvi
Tamizuddin Khan's case. On the short ground
that under section 42 af the Government of
India Act, 1935, the Governor- General had no
power to make by Ordinance any provision as
to. the Constitution of the country. The
Emergency Powers Ordinance IX of 1955 was
held to be invalid’ whereupon the Governor-
General made a Special Reference to the |
Federal Court which was answered on the 16th ‘
May 1955 . Dealing with the validity of this |
action the Court expressed the opinion that the }
Constituent Assembly and not the Constituent h
Convention as was proposed to be sct up by the
Governor-General would be competent to excr-
cise all powers conferred by the Indian Inde-
pendence Act, 1947, and secondly that in the
Situation presented in the Reference, the
Governor-General had during the interim peri-
od the power under the common law, special of
State necessity of retrospectively validating the
laws ‘listed in the Schedule to the Ordinance. °
1955, and all those laws now decided upon by _
the Constituent Assembly or during the afore:
said period shall be valid and enforced in the
same way on which day they purported to hay ie
come into force, _ =


            
            Cornelius, J as he then was differed with
the opinion of the Court that the Governor-
General could on the basis of the State necessi
ty validate the laws wines were declared invalid
by the Federal Court opined that there was
no provision in the Constitution and no rule of
law applicable to the situation by which the
Gevernor-General can, in the light of the
Courts decision in the case of Usif Ptel by
Proclamation or otherwise, validate laws enu
merated in the schedule to the emergency
powers ordinance, 1955 whether temporarily
or permanently.

In accordance with the opinion given by
the Federal Court, a new Constituent Assembly
was elected and. it eventually succeeded in
framing a Constitution which came into force 
on the 23rd March 1956 . ........

A National Assembly was yet to be elected :
under the 1956-Constitution when Mr Iskander 
Mirza who had become the first President by a 
Proclamation issued on the 7th October 1958, 
abrogated _the Constitution: dissolved the 
National and Provincial Assemblies and
imposed Martial Law throughout the country
General Muhammad Ayub Khan Commander-
in Chief of the pakistan army was appointed
as the chief administrator of martial law. This
was the third great mishap which hit Pakistan
like a bolt from the blue

On the 13th October 1958, Criminal
Appeals State vs Dosso and three other con
nected matters came up for hearing before the
Court

Delivering the majority judgement of the 
Court Munir CJ held now disappeared from
the new Legal Order, the Frontier Crimes Regu
lations(III of 1901) was by reason of Articls IV
of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Order
1958 still in force and all proceedings in cases
in which the validity of that Regulation had
beed called in question having abated the con
victions of the respondents recorded
by the Council-of-Elders was good  
The judgment in State vs Dosso set the seal  
of legitimacy on the Government of Iskander 
Mirza though he himself was deposed from  
office by Muhammad Ayub Khan. a day after 
the judgment was delivered on the 23rd October 1958 . and he assumed to himself the office of 
the President.. The judgments In the cases  
Maulvi Tamizuddin Khan: Governor-General  Reference 1 of 1955 and The Stale vs Dosso 
had profound effect on the constitutional devel-opments in Pakistan. As a commentator has remarked. a perfectly good country was made 
into a laughing stock. A country which came 
into being with a written Constitution providing 
for a parliamentary form of Government with distribution of State power between the Execu-tive, Legislature, and the Judiciary was soon  
converted into an autocracy and eventually  degenerated into military dictatorship. From 
now onwards people who were the recipients of delegated sovereignty from the Almighty, 
ceased to have any share in the exercise of the 
State powers. An all omnipotent sovereign now 
ruled over the people in similar manner as the  
alien commander of the army who has con-
quered a country and his "will" alone regulates 
the conduct and behaviour of the subjugated  populace. Martial Law remained in force till the 
7th of June 1962 . when in pursuance to a 
Mandate he had obtained by some kind of ref-erendum Muhammad Ayub Khan gave a 
Constitution to the country. Under it he himself became the first President; revoked the Procla-
mation of 7th October 1958 and lifted Martial
Law.  ..(page-220)   
Mr Iskander Mirza. and Mr Ayub 
Khan had joined hands on the night between 7th  
and 8th October 1958 . to overthrqw the nation-
al legal order unmindful of the fact that by 
abrogating the 1956-Constitution they were not  
only committing acts of treason. but were also destroying for ever the agreement reached after 
            ‘laborious efforts between the citizens of East
Pakistan and citizens of West Pakistan to live
together as one Nation. The cessation of East
Pakistan thirteen years later_is, in my view,
directly attributable to this tragic incident...

In early 1965 Muhammad Ayub Khan: was
re-elected as President. The general impression
in the country was that the election was rigged.
Towards the end of 1968, an agitation started
against his despotic rule and the undemocratic
Constitution which he had imposed on the
country. The agitation gathered momentum
every day and was accompanied by wide spread
disturbances throughout the country. In
February 1969, Muhammad Ayub Khan called a
round table conference of political leaders for
resolving the political issues which had led to
the disturbance. A solution was near insight,
when all of a sudden Muhammad Ayub Khan
decided to relinquish the office of the President
and asked the Defence Forces to

The Mandate given by the outgoing
President to the Commander-in-Chief was thus _
to fulfill his constitutional responsibilities; to
restore law and order; and to carry out his legal
duty in this behalf.

Muhammad Yahya Khan, Commander-in-
Chief, who had taken an oath, that he will be
faithful to the Constitution of 1962 and to
Pakistan, however, in disregard of his constitu-
tional and legal duty by a Proclamation issued
on the 26th March 1969, abrogated the Cons-
titution ; dissolved the National and Provincial
assemblies and imposed Martial Law through-
out the country. This was the fourth great con-
stitutional mishap which befell Pakistan in less
than 16 years.” (The underlinings are mine)

This was, however, only a part of the story. The
unfathomed misery, neglect and discrimination suf-
fered by the Bengali speaking Pakistani citizens in
all spheres of life were not reflected here. In 1966
one of the major parties launched a six point consti-
tutional programme for economic salvations and
autonomy for the then East Pakistan but not at all
heeded to either by Field Marshal Ayub Khan or
thereafter by General Yahya Khan. However the
first general election in Pakistan was helq in 1970
while by that time.as many as four general elections
were already held in India although both the count
tries achieved independence at the same time.

50. In quoting further from the Judgement of
Yaqub Ali J in Asma Jilani at page 223:
<br>
“On the 30th March 1970, Yahya Khan
promulgated the Legal Framework Order and
under its provisions, elections were held in. |
December 1970, to the National and Provincial _
Assemblies under the supervision of a Judge of
this Court acting as the Chief Election Commis.
sioner. After a good deal of political manoeu-
vring, the National Assembly was summoned
by Muhammad Yahya Khan for the 3rd March
1971 . However, shortly before. that he - post-
_ poned the session indefinitely, Awami League,
the dominant political party. of East Pakistan
and who.held a clear majority in the National
Assembly reacted to this decision very sharply.
To meet the situation Military action was taken
on the 25th March 1971, which lasted for sev-
eral months. These strong measures.had, how-
ever, no effect on-the events which were shap-
ing fast in the Eastern Wing. It led to an armed
surrection by Awami League and their support-
ers.”



51. Part XI
A Nation was Born:
<br>
It may be noted that a general election
was held in December, 1970 throughout the erst |
while Pakistan. Its pre-dominant purpose was tol
frame a Constitution for the entire Pakistan. The
National Assembly was due to be convened on
March 3, 1971 but it was indefinitely postponed on
March 1, 1971 . This postponement of holding of the
over Pakistan specially ‘in the erstwhile East
Pakistan. 


            
52. The rest Was history. It was a history of
human tragedy. It was a history of human misery. It
was a history how unarmed, docile, peace loving
and soft speaking Bangalees, when pushed to the
wall, rose as a nation and drove away the valiant
Pakistan Army from Bangladesh as the Athenians
routed the army of Daraus in the battle of Marathan
in 492 BC.

53. By March 7, 1971 the flag of Bangladesh
was flying all over the country save and except the
cantonments. On the late evening of March 25,1971
the Pakistan Amny unleashed a reign of terror and
launched history’s one of the most brutal and blood-
ist attack and massacred thousands of unarmed
Bangalees. The genocide perpetrated by the Pakis-
tani rulers upon the Bangalees is compared only to
the massacre of Baghdad by Holagu Khan in 1258
and the massacre of Delhi by Nadir Shah in 1739.
This reign of terror and one of the worst genocide in
the history of mankind continued for the next nine
months and ended with the deliberate and diabolical
murders of the best sons of our soil on December
13-14, 1971.

54. With the declaration of Independence of
Bangladesh at the dead of night following March 25,
1971, a Nation was born with blood and tears. The
Bangalees armed themselves and started to put up
resistance all over the then East Pakistan which was
initially spear headed by the Bengali speaking
Officers and men of the then East Pakistan Rifles,
the Bengali units‘of the Pakistan army and the police
forced till the exile Government of Bangladesh
formed its Army under the over-all command of
Colonel MAG Osmani.

55. We have narrated the back-ground histo-
Ty, to Some extent, leading to the commencement of
our liberation war in order to highlight and honour
the emotional and moral values of our liberation war
and the high ideal for which our three million mar-
tyrs sactificed their lives.

56. On April 10, 1971, the Independence of
Bangladesh was formally proclaimed at
Mujibnagar. This is the first constitutional docu-
ment. It heralded the birth of Bangladesh on and
from March 26,. 1971 as a Sovereign People’s
Republic. .

57. This Proclamation of Independence was
given the force of law by the Provisional Consti-
tution of Bangladesh Order, 1972.

58. On the same day on April 10, 1971, Laws
Continuance Enforcement Order was also made. -

59. This was a provisional arrangement. It
provided for continuance of the existing laws in
force in Bangladesh on March 25, 1971 . It also pro-
vided for an oath of allegiance to Bangladesh for all
government officials of Bangladesh.



60. The War of liberation continued for near-
ly 9(nine) months and ended on December 16, 1971,
with the surrender of Pakistan army. Bangladesh
own its independence at the cost nearly 3(three) mil-
lion martyrs. The flag of Pakistan was lowered in
Bangladesh for all time to come and the Glory of
Bangladesh was raised and flew high above the
horizon proudly and gracefully beating against the
wind. Our national anthem was played and the
Bangalee nation wept and solemnly pledged that
they would never forget their martyrs, rather, they
would uphold. their dreams, their ideals, their
visions.
            
