Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102

61. When we're-live this proud moment of
our Nation-hood, we cannot but help thinking with
Charles Dickens: __
<br>
“It was the best of times __<br>
It is the worst of times.
<br>
It was the age of wisdom .
<br>
It was the age of foolishness _
<br>
It was the epoch of belief jee
<br>
It was the epoch of incredulity <br>
Tt was the spring of hope Se oe, Tee
It'was the winter of despair”<br> (abridged). fo
-o-We have narrated the earlier history leading to
the liberation of Bangladesh but not without a pur-.

            
            pose. Because, it is always true that ‘a page of his-
tory is worth a volume of logic’ (Justice Holmes).
We only wanted to highlight the long history of our
struggle for independence from the British yoke and
thereafter our frustration for such discrimination
under the naked domination of the West Pakistani
Rulers. We wanted to impress how our self-respect
was trampled and insulted in every turn, leading us
to our struggle for autonomy which was transformed
into a War of Liberation.

Part XIII
Enactment of the Constitution

62. Now going back to the genesis of our
Constitutional history. After independence, the
Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh was created by
the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh Order,
1972 (PO No. 22 of 1972), on March 22, 1972. The
said Constituent Assembly consisted of the elected
representatives of this country, elected both in the
National Assembly and also in the Provincial
Assembly in the elections held in December, 1970
and in January, 1971, in the erstwhile East Pakistan.
This Constituent Assembly completed its task in a
remarkably short period of time and framed the
Constitution of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
on November 4, 1972. The Constitution commenced
on and from December 16, 1972. Having thus ful-
filled its functions as the Constituent Assembly, on
the commencement of the Constitution it stood dis-
solved. This was recorded at paragraph | of the
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution,

63. It may be mentioned here that this new
nation plunged into a disaster and a constitutional
crisis when in the early morning of August 15, 1975,
the President of Bangladesh with his family mem-
bers were brutally killed by a section of army offi-
cers and Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed in conspira-
cy with them seized the office of the President of
Bangladesh. Bangladesh was tuled by Martial Law
Proclamations for nearly the next 4(four) years. The
said whole period of Martial Law was sought to be
validated firstly by the Proclamations (Amendment)
Order, 1977 (Proclamation Order No. 1 of 1977) and


secondly by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment)
Act, 1979 (Act No. 1 of 1979), 
Part XIV

Law

64. As such, before we consider What Martial
Law means, we would try to understand the concept
of ‘law’ first.

65. Thurman Arnold in his article The
Symbols of government’ (1935) observed :

“Obviously, ‘law’ can never be defined,
With equal obviousness, however, it Should be
said that the adherents of the legal institution |
must never give up the struggle to define law, |
because it is an essential part of the ideal that it |
is rational and capable of definition... Hence
the verbal expenditure necessary in the upkeep
of the ideal of ‘law’ is colossal and never end: |
ing. The legal scientist is compelled by the cli.
mate of opinion in which he finds himself o

66. Professor George Whitecross Paton after
considering works of a number of authorities since
ancient Greek philosophers approached the concept }
of ‘law’ in this manner :

“Law may shortly be described in terms of
a legal order tacitly or formally accepted ’by a
community. It consists of the body of rules 
which are seen to operate as binding rules in
that community, backed by some mechanism
accepted by the community by means of which
sufficient compliance with the rules may be 
secured to enable the system or set of rules to
continue to be seen as binding in nature.

(Quoted from GW Paton on ‘A text book of
Jurisprudence’, Fourth Edition 1972 at P-7""

67. Earlier, Sir John Salmond in his “Treatise
on Jurisprudence’ (7th Edition, 1924) app”
the concept of ‘law’ thus:

            
            'All law he argued, is not made by the leg-
.islature. In England much of it is made by the
law courts. But all law, however made is rec
ognized and administered by the courts and no
rules are recognized and administered by the
courts which are not rules of laws. It is therefore
to the courts and not to the legislature that we
must go in order to ascetain the true nature of
the law. Accordingly he defined law as the
body of principles recognized and applied by
the state in the administration of justice, as the
rules recognized and acted on by courts of jus
tice.
” (The underlinings are mine)

(Quoted from Salmond on Jurisprudence,
twelfth Edition, 1966, page-36).

68. In his book ‘The Concept of Law’
pofessor HL A.Hart, treated the pathology of Legal
gystem in this way : P-117 to 118:

“Evidence for the existence of a legal sys-
tem must therefore be drawn from two different
sectors of social life. The normal, unproblemat-
ic case where we can say confidently that a
legal system exists, is just one where it is clear
that the two-sectors are congruent in their
respective typical concerns with the law.
Crudely put, the facts are, that the rules recog-
nized as valid at the official level are generally
obeyed. Sometimes, however, the official sector
may be detached from the private sector, in the
sense that there is no longer general obedience
to the rules which are valid according to the cri-
teria of validity in use in the courts. The variety
of ways in which this may happen belongs to
the pathology of legal systems: for they repre-
sent a breakdown in the complex congruent
practice Which is referred to when we make the
external statement of fact that a legal system
exists. There is here a partial failure of what is
ar ts Whenever, from within the partic-
ular, Such a bes make internal statements of
law. Such a breakdown may be the product of
different disturbing factors. ‘Revolution,’ where
rival claims to govern are made from within the
group, is only one case. and though this will
always involve the breach of some of the laws
of the existing system. it may entail only the
legally unauthorized substitution of a new set of
individulas as officials. and not a new constitu-
tion of legal system, Enemy occupation, where
a rival claim to govern without authority under
the existing system comes from without, is
another case; and the simple breakdown of
ordered legal control in the face of anarchy or
banditry without political pretensions to govern
is yet another.

In each of these cases there may be half-
way stages during which the courts function,
either on the territory or in exile, and still use

the criteria of legal validity of the old once
firmly established system; but these orders are
ineffective in the territory. The stage at which it

is right to say in such cases that the legal system
has finally ceased to exist is a thing not suscep-
tible of any exact determination. Plainly, if

there is some considerable chance of a restora-
tion or if the disturbance of the established sys-
tem is an incident in a general war of which the
issue is still uncertain, no unqualified assertion
that it has ceased to exist would be warranted..
This is so just because the statement that a legal
system exists is of a sufficiently broad and gen-
eral type to allow for interruptions; it is not ver-
ified or falsified by what happens in short
spaces of time.” — (The underlinings are mine)

69. Under the American Realism, the view of
O.W. Holmes is as follows:

“Take the fundamental question, What con-
stitutes the law? You will find some text writers
telling you that it is something different from
what is decided by the courts of Massachusetts
or England, that it is a system of reason, that it
is a deduction from principles of ethics or
admitted axioms or what not, which may or
may not coincide with the decisions. But if we
“take the view of our friend the bad man we shall
find that he does not care two straws for the
axioms or deductions, but that he does want to
know what the Massachusetts or England courts

            
            are likely to do in fact I am much of his mind
The prophecies of what the courts will do in
fact and nothing more pretentious are what I
mean by the law" (The underlinings are mine)

(Quoted from Lloyd’s Introduction to
Jurisprudence at page-670).

70. In the case of Asma Jilani vs Government
of the Punjab PLD 1972 SC 139, a question of
nature, scope and content of law was raised on
behalf of one of the appellants. Hamoodur Rahman,
CJ dealt with the question in this manner at p-159:

“The task of a Judge in the circumstances,
is not an easy one. But is it necessary for him to
define law ? Law itself is not a legal concept,
for, what is law is really a theoretical. question.
Conclusions of law do not depend upon the def-
inition of law nor are legal judgments based on
definitions of law and, in fact, as Sir Iver
Jennings has said in his Article on the Institu-
tional Theory published in Modern Theories of
Law, Oxford University Press, 1933 (page 83)
“the task which many writers on jurisprudence
attempt to fulfill in defining law is a futile one”,
for, according to him, “law has no definition
except in a particular context.”

So far as a Judge is concerned, if a defini-
tion is necessary, all that he has to see is that the
law which he is called upon to administer is
made by a person or authority legally compe-
tent to make laws and the law is capable _ of
being enforced by the legal machinery. This, in
my view, brings in the notion both of legitima-
cy and efficacy.

71. ‘In referring to Jurisprudence, his Lord-
ship further held :

“The thesis of Dias is thus the same as that
now adopted by the learned counsel; namely,
that “the legality of the law-constitutive medi-
um only comes about when the Courts accept,
or are made to accept it.”

In the above noted case, Yaqub Ali J also con-
sidered what the law is in order to determine


whether the Martial Law Orders, Martial Law
Regulations, Presidential Orders and Ordinances by
General Yahya Khan, may be recognized by the
Courts. It should be noted in this connection that law
was not defined in the Constitution of Pakistan of
1962. Yaqub Ali J traveled, the world of 
Jurisprudence to find the real face of ‘law’ 

72. We-quote some of the observation of
Yaqub Ali J as follows;

“In introduction to ‘Law in the Making"»
CK Allen mentions two antithetic Conceptions 
of growth of law: (i) law is which is imposed by,
a sovereign will; and (ii) law which develops
within society of its own vitality. He Criticizes
Austin who defined “law” as the will of the sov-.
ereign and points out that whatever be the con.
stitutional instrument which secures observance
and enforcement of law—and some sanction of
this kind is certainly indispensable—there is no
historical justification for the view that this
power always and necessarily be a determinate,
“human superior” which at the same time cre-
ates all law. It is impossible in every form of
society governed by law to disengage and per-
sonify a “sovereign” as thus understood, with |
the artificial precision which Hobbs and Austin
assume.......... Dugit’s definition is as follows:

“Men live together in groups and societies; |
they are dependent upon, solidarist with, one
another. They have common needs which they
can satisfy only by a common life: and, at the
same time, they have different needs the satis:
faction of which they assure by the exchange of
reciprocal services, The progress of humanity is
assured by the continuous growth, in both
directions, of individual_activity. Man, so
placed in society, has the obligation to realize
this progress, because in so doing he realizes
himself.

From the imminent force of things, there
fore, there arises a‘rule of conduct which we
may postulate as a rule of law.”

            
            Roscoe Pound states that more than one
reason led American realists which define law
in terms of judicial process. One is the central
position of the Court in the Anglo-American
legal system and the concrete character of a
legal percept in that system as a product of the
courts rather than of the universities. Again,
economic determinism and psychological real-
ism lead to scrutiny of the work of individual
Judges, and skeptical relativism leads to dis-
counting of norms and rules and authoritative
guides to determination. Certainly the judicial
process (to which today we must add the
administrative process) is something of which a
theory of the subject-matter of jurisprudence
must take account.........


In “A_Grammar of Politics” Laski_adds :
“To those for whom law is a simple command,
legal by virtue of the source from which it
comes, it is not likely that such complexities as
these will be popular, We are urging that law is,
in truth, not the will of the State, but that from
which the will of the State derives whatever
moral_authority it may possess.....It assumes
that the rationale of obedience is.in all the intri-
cate facts of social organization and in no one
group of facts. It denies at once the sovereignty
of the State, and that more subtle doctrine by
Which the State is at once the master and the
servant of law by willing to limit itself to cer- °
tain tested rules of conduct. It insists that what
is important in law is not the fact of command,
but the end at which that command aims and the
way It achieves the end. It sees society, not as.a
pyramid in which the State sits crowned upon
the "Summit, but_as_a system of _co-operatin
interests through which, and in which, the indi-
vidual finds his scheme of values. It argues that
each individual scheme so found gives’ to the
“law whatever, of moral rightness it contains.
and any other view is seeking to invest coer-
cive authority with ethical content on grounds
which analysis shows to be simply the fact of
the power to coerce, That power may how its
way to success, but it does not, by the fact of the

victory, become a moral agent. We argue,
rather, that our rules of conduct are justified
only as what they are in working induces our
allegiance to them.”

73. Yaqub Ali J himself explained why he
had to explore so much of abstract jurisprudence in
his Judgment, at page 235 :

“I have burdened this order with different
theories of law not only for the purpose of find-
ing out the essential qualities of law, but also

because during the last thirteen years or more
we have so much gone astray from the rule of
law_that_not only the common man, but_the
lawyers and Judges alike need to refresh their
minds about the true import and form of law.”

And then his Lordship gave his own view on
law :

“The preponderant view appears to be that
law is not the will of a sovereign. Law is a body
of principles called-rules_ or norms-recognized
and applied by the State in the administration of
justice as rules recognized and acted upon by
the Courts of justice. It must have the contents
and form of law. It should contain one or more
elements on which the different theories of law
are based, and give expression to the will of the
people whose conduct and behaviour the law. is
going to regulate. The will of the people_is
nowadays often expressed through the medium
of Legislature comprising of the chosen repre-
sentatives of the people. The will of a single
man howsoever laudable or sordid is a behest or
a command, but is certainly not law as under-
stood in juristic sense.” :

<2. (The underlinings are mine)

I also quoted extensively from various books on
Jurisprudence in order to explore the wide horizon
of law to understand the concept of 'No Law'
because even after advent of so much of civilization
and philosophy, we still confuse ourselves between
what is law and what is the dearth of law so much
so that very often the supreme law of the land is
being pushed out and obliterated by some shadow

            
            which does not even come within the definition of
‘law’ as defined in our Constitution.

Although ‘Law’ was not defined in the 1962
Constitution of Pakistan but our Constitution
defines law as follows :

““law’ means any Act, Ordinance, Order,
Rule, Regulation, Bye-law, Notification or
other legal instrument, and any custom or
usage, having the force of law in Bangladesh.”

It is apparent that ‘law’ as defined in Article 152
of the Constitution of Bangladesh, does not include

Proclamations or Martial Law Regulations or
Martial Law Orders.

Part XV
The Parliament-—Historical Growth

74. Before we enter into discussions on the
vires of the Fifth Amendment validating the Martial
Law Proclamations and many others, let us first con-
sider the legislative powers of the Parliament.

75. Parliament has been established by
Article 65 of the Constitution. The legislative pow-
ers of the Republic has been vested in this body
which is acclaimed as the House of the Nation in the
Constitution. But before we discuss about the legal

concept of our Parliament, let us look at the British
Parliament first.

76. Professor AV Dicey, in his celebrated
treatise ‘Introduction To The Study Of The Law Of
The Constitution’ (Tenth Edition, 1959), views

Parliamentary Sovereignty in this manner at pages
39-40 :

“The sovereignty of Parliament is (from a
legal point of view) the dominant characteristic
of our political institutions

The principle of Parliamentary sovereignty
means neither more nor less than this, namely,
that_Parliament_thus defined has, under the
English constitution, the tight_to make _or
unmake any law whatever: and, further, that no
person or body is recognized by the law of

England as having a right to override or set side
the legislation of Parliament.” 

(The underlinings are mine)

77. The history of this omnipotent Parlia
ment dates back to nearly one thousand years; Long
before the Norman conquest in 1066, there Used. to
be the meetings of the ‘wise’. These meetings per
formed the functions of the Teutonic national assembly
bly known as Witenagemot. After the Norman con-
quest, the meeting of the wise was replaced by the
Curia Regis. From time to time, the feudal great
councils was attended not only by the tenants-in
chief but also the under-tenants on SUMMONS from ‘
the King. In April, 1275, Edward I summoned his 
first general parliament at Westminister and the 
Statute of Westminister was executed. In the 23rd
year of his reign in 1295, Edward I was in serious
difficulties. There was rebellion of the Welsh, war
with Scotland was continuing, the French fleet
reached the English Coast and landed at Dover _
Under this critical condition, the King felt that he
require the support of the entire nation by way of
their common counsel and adequate grant of an aid.
He accordingly summoned a Parliament to meet at
Westminister in November, 1295. This was for the
first time the national parliament was attended by ‘
the barons and knights, the burgesses and the clergy.

78. This great assembly, however did not
form a single body but each of the three bodies dis-
cussed and voted separately. They also made pro-
portional grants in favour of the King. The grat
assemblies of 1275 and 1295 in the fullness of time
became the modern English Parliament which is the
model for parliamentary system of Government of
many a countires all over the globe

79. In those assemblies germane was the
principle of democracy which was taking root in
England though very slowly but surely, more
seven hundred years ago. The principle of democra-
cy was no doubt in a crude form but it started to
bloom and the people of England themselves was
the centre piece. There the people brought the revo-
lutionary ideas of Hobbs, Locks into actual practice


            
            in the national politics It is they who protected their
rights and liberty against all onslaughts from time
immemorial.

80. On the concept of law and the Constitu-
tion Sir Ivor Jennings, in his treatise ‘Cabinet
Government third Edition, 1969, expressed the real
sentiment of the English people at page-1-2 :

",.With us, ‘the law’ is not an emana-
tion from authorities set up or provided for by a
written and formal document. It consists of the
legislation of Parliament and the rules extracted
fom the decisions of judicial authorities. The
powers of these bodies and the relations
between them are the product of history. The
constitutional authorities have claimed_and
have exercised law-making functions and the
people has acquiesced in their exercise. Revolu-
tion has helped to determine constitutional
powers; but no revolution has produced a per-
manent written constitution. It has produced,
instead, the recognition of a rule that Parliament
can legislate _as_ it pleases and that what
Parliament enacts is law. ..........

Neither the Cabinet nor the office of Prime
Minister was established by legislation, nor has
either been recognized by the courts of law
  These persons are under no legal obliga-

tion to obey, but they do obey. There is a whole
complex of rules outside ‘the law’,.........s+e+0
They are called by various names, but are now
commonly referred to as ‘constitutional con-
Ventions”. (The underlinings are mine)

81. In early 17th century, the supremacy of
the Parliament was not even achieved. At that peri-
od of time both the Parliament and the Judiciary was
fighting against the supremacy of the divine right of
the King to rule his subjects and also with his pre-
rogatives which Were sought to be expanded during
the reign of James I and Charles I with the active
support of many a jurist of that age. Besides, the Star
Chamber Was there. The said Court was infamous
for extracting Confessions by torture, sometimes at
the behest of the Crown. At that time Judges used to
serve at the pleasure of the Kings and often they
used to be dismissed as Coke CJ, himself was dis-
missed in 1617.

82. But the Bill of Rights, 1689, made all the
difference. It dispelled all confusions and emphati-
cally declared the supremacy of Parliament. Its
terms altered the balance of power in favour of the
Parliament instead of the Crown. From then on the
Courts in England accepted an Act of Parliament as
valid. This Act has been followed by the Act of
Settlement, 1700. This among others, provided for
the security of tenure for the judiciary during good
behaviour. This Act ended the power of the Crown
to dismiss the judges at his will. From then on the
judges of the Superior Courts could not be removed
short of impeachment. This is how the independence
of judiciary was achieved three hundred years ago.
The judiciary in its turn ensured the supremacy of
the Parliament by judicial pronouncements.

83. But inspite of the apparent supremacy of
the Parliament there was always an inbuilt limitation
inherent in the system itself. Leslie Stephens
explains the point :

"..........It is limited, so to speak, both
from within and from without; from within,
because the legislature is the product of a cer-
tain social conditions, and determined by what-
ever determines the society: and from without,
because the power of imposing laws is depend-
ent upon the instinct of subordination, which is
itself limited, If a legislature decided _that_all
blue_eyed babies should be murdered, the
preservation of blue eyed babies would be ille-
gal; but legislators must_go mad_before they
could pass such_a law, and subjects be idiotic
before they could submit to it.”

( The underlinings are mine)

[Quoted from Hilaire Barnett: Constitu-
tional And ‘Administrative Law, Fourth Edition,
2002 Page 196] es

84. Again, in the case of RV HM Treasury ex
parte Smedley (1985)1 AILE R 589, the challenge

            
            was with regard to the payment from the Conso-
lidated Fund, without express parliamentary
approval. Sir John Donaldson MR held :

 .....Before considering Mr Smedley”s
objections ...... I think that I should say a word
about the respective roles of Parliament and the
courts. Although the United Kingdom has no
written constitution, it_is a constitutional con-
vention of the highest importance that the legis-
lature and the judicature are separate and inde-
mate rights of Parliament over the judicature
which are immaterial for present_purposes . It
therefore behoves the courts to be over sensitive
to the paramount need to refrain from trespass-
ing on the province of Parliament or, so far as
this can be avoided, even appearing to do so.
Although it is not a matter for me, I would hope
and expect that Parliament would be similarly
sensitive to the need to refrain from trespassin
on the province of the courts....... It is the func-
tion of Parliament to legislate and legislation is
necessarily in written form. It is the function of
the courts to construe and interpret that legisla-
tion. Putting it in popular language, it_is for
Parliament to make the laws and for the courts
to tell the nation, including members, of both
Houses of Parliament what_those_laws
mean...... . At the present moment, there ie ne
Order in Council to which Mr Smedley can
object as being unauthorized. .,....... In many,
and possibly most, circumstances the proper
course would undoubtedly be for the courts to
invite the applicant to renew his application if
and when an order was made, but in some Cir-
cumstances an expression of view on questions
of law which would arise for decision if
Parliament were to approve a draft may be of
service not only to the arties, but also to each
House_of Parliament itself. This course was
adopted in R vs Electricity Comrs, ex P London
Electricity Joint Committee Co (1920) Ltd.
(1924) KB 171, (1923) All ER Rep 150 In that
case an inquiry was in progress, the cost of
which would have been wholly wasted, if there
after the minister and Parliament had approved
the scheme only to be told at that late stage that
the scheme was ultra vires
(The underlinings are mine)

85. Still the Courts in its anxiety to dispense
justice finds ways and means to do exactly what it
thinks that the Parliament intends to do. In the lan-
guage of HWR Wade at page -418

"The Courts may presume the Parliamen,
when it grants powers, intends them to be exer
cised_in_a_ right and proper way. Since
Parliament is very unlikely to make provision to
the contrary, this allows considerable scone for 
the courts to devise _a set of canons of fair 
administrative procedure, suitable to the needs
of the time”.

(The underlining's are Mine)

(Quoted from HWR Wade: ‘Administrative
Law’ Fifth Edition, 1982),


Part XVI
The Constitution : Legal Concept

86. In contradistinction to United Kingdom
with unwritten Constitution, there exists in the
United States of America, separation of powers, on
the basis of a written Constitution.

87. The Constitution, however, does not
itself spell out the concept of separation of powers
but the relevant Provisions of the Constitution show
such separation of powers.

88. As a matter of fact the concept of separa-
tion of powers as propounded predominantly by
Baron Montesquieu was put into actual. practice
through the Constitution of the United States:
Montesquieu observed in De | Esprit des Los
(1748) as follows :

“When the legislative and executive pow’
ers are united in the same person, or in the same
body of magistrates, there can be no liberty
... Again, there is no liberty if the power of
judging is not separated from the legislative and
executive. If it were joined with the legislative



            
            the life and liberty of the subject would be
exposed to arbitrary control; for the judge
would then be the legislator. If it were joined to
the executive power, the judge might behave
with violence and oppression. There would be
an end to everything, if the same man, or the
same bodey, whether of the nobles or the people,
were to exercise those three powers, that enact-
ing laws that of executing public affairs, and
that of trying crimes or Individual causes.”

(Quoted from Hilaire Barnett: (Constitutional
and Administrative Law, Fourth Edition, 2002,
at page- 106).

89. ‘In any State, there are three essential bod-
ies namely, the legislature, the Executive and the
Judiciary. The legislature legislates to cater the
needs of the society, the executive runs the adminis-
tration with the laws made by the leg-
islature while the Judiciary upholds the Constitution
and the laws of the country and.ensure that the other
two great bodies of the State function within the
bounds of the Constitution and the laws made there
under. It is desirable that there should be a clear
demarcation in those three bodies in their respective
functions so that none of those bodies can act arbi-
trarily, rather, each one of those bodies keeps the
other within its legal bounds. This system of checks
and balances between the three institutions of the
State is the essence of the doctrine of Separation of
Powers,

90.The Republic of the United State is
based on constitutional democracy with Separation
of Powers. It put the theory of Montesquieu into
actual practice, The framers of the Constitution took
all possible care that the powers of the Republic is
not concentrated in one hand or in one Institution.
Although this doctrine was applied in the later part
of the 18th century but as a matter of fact Aristotle
(384-322 BC) identified the three elements of the
State in his famous treatise ‘The Politics’.

91. James Madison in the Federalist Papers
embodies 1787-88 explained the above Principle
as embodied in the US Constitution in this manner :

“The constitution of Massachusetts has
observed a sufficient, though less pointed cau-
tion, in expressing this fundamental article of
liberty. It declares, ‘that the legislative depart-
ment shall never exercise the executive and
judicial powers, or either of them; the executive
shall never exercise the legislative and judicial
powers, or either of them: the judicial shall
never exercise the legislative and executive
powers, or either of them’ This declaration cor-
responds precisely with the doctrine of Montes-
quieu.......... It goes no farther than to prohib-

- it any one of the entire departments from exer-
cising the powers of another department. In the
very constitution to which it is prefixed, a par-
tial mixture of powers has been admitted
vena wsies (Quoted from Peter Woll on ‘American
Government’, 1962 at Page-8).

In the United States, its‘Constitution assumed
the central position. All three major organs of the
State owe its existence to the Constitution and
revolve round it. All legislative and executive func-
tions must conform to the Constitution, otherwise,
the judiciary in exercise of its role as the defender of
the Constitution would declare such actions as ultra
vires to the Constitution.

92. Similar is the position in Bangladesh . It
has a Constitution which is controlled and rigid in
character. Like the United States, all three great
Departments owe its existence to the Constitution.
In this Rule we are concerned with the legality of
ratification and confirmation of the Proclamations
etc. in pursuance of insertion of Paragraph 18 to the
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution by Section 2 of
the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979. As
such, we are to consider first, what is a Constitution,
its role and impact on the Republic, and then the
Parliament, one of the three Institutions, created by
the Constitution, and the extent of its power lo
amend the said Constitution.

92. Professor KC Wheare, in his celebrated
book: ‘Modern Constitution’, Second Edition, 1966
at pages-1-5 explains Constitution in this manner:

            
            The word ‘constitution’ is commonly used
in at least two senses in any ordinary discussion
of political affairs. First_of all it is used to
describe the whole sys f government of a
country, the collection of rules which establish
and regulate or govern the government.........-
..... What_is_more, this selection is almost
invariably a selection of legal rules only. “The
Constitution’, then, for most countries in the
world, is a selection of the Legal rules which
govern the government of that country and
which have been embodied in a document.

Perhaps the most famous example of a
Constitution in this sense is the Constitution of
the United States of America..... The Americans
in 1787 declared: ‘We, the people of the United
States....... do ordain and establish this
Constitution for the United States of America
Since that time the practice of having a written
document containing the principles of govern-
mental organization has become well estab-
lished and Constitution has come to have this
meaning. ...........

What is more, in the United States, if on
act of Congress or on act of any state legislature
or of any other rule-making authority in the
country, conflicts with the terms of the
Constitution, it is void.”

94. Professor Wheare traced the origin of the
Constitution in this manner at page-6

“If we investigate the origins of modern
Constitutions, we find that practically without
exception, they were drawn up_and_adopted
because people wished to make a fresh start, so
far as the statement of their system of govern-
ment was concerned, The desire or need for a
fresh start arose either because, as in the United
States, some neighbouring Communities
wished to unite together under a new govern-
ment; or because, as in Austria or Hungary or
Czechoslovakia after 1918, Communities had
been released from an Empire as the result of a
war and were now free to govern themselves; or
because, as in France in 1789 or the USSR in
1917, a revolution had made a break with the
past and a new form of government on new
principles was desired; or because as in
Germany after 1918 or in France in 1875 or in
1946, defeat in war had broken the continuity of
government and a fresh start was needed after
the war. The circumstances in which a break
with the past and the need fora fresh start come
almost every case in modern times, countries
have a Constitution for the very simple and ele.
mentary reason that they wanted, for some reg.
son, to begin again and so they put down in
writing the main outline, at least, of their pro-
posed system of government. This has been the
practice certainly since 1787 when the
American Constitution was drafted. and as the
years passed no doubt imitation and the force of
example have led all countries to think it neces-
sary to have a Constitution.”

95. Regarding supremacy of the Constitution
and the limitation on its amendment, Professor
Wheare stated at page-7.

“The nature of the limitation to be imposed
on a government, and therefore the degree to
which a Constitution will be supreme over a
government, depends upon the objects which
the framers of the Constitution wish to safe-
guard. In the first place they may want to do no
more than ensure that the Constitutin wish to safe
altered casually or carelessly or by subterfuge
or implication; they may want to secure that this
important document is not lightly tampered
with, but solemnly, with due notice and deliber-
ation, consciously amended. In that case it is
legitimate to require some special process of
constitutional amendment-say that the legisla _
ture may amend the Constitution only by a two: _
thirds majority or after a general election or per
haps upon three months’ notice.

96. In almost all the countries the Constitution
is glorified as the supreme law of the country in"


            
            contradiction to the other laws enacted by the
legislative authorities of the country. This superior
position of the Constitution in contradistinction to
other enactments passed by the legislatures has been
lucidly explained by John Marshall, the Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States,
more than two hundred years ago in the case of
Marbury VS Madison in 1803 :

“The question, whether an act, repugne
to the constitution, can become the law of the
land, is a question deeply interesting to the
United States; but, happily, not of an intricacy
proportioned to its interest. It seems only nec-
essary to recognize certain principles, supposed
to have been long and well established, to
decide it.

................. The Powers of the legislature are
defined_and_limited_and that those limits may
not be mistaken, or forgotten, the constitution is
written. To what purpose are powers limited,
and to what purpose is that limitation. Com-
mitted to writing, if this limits may at any time
be passed by those intended to be restrained?
The distinction between a government with
limit and unlimited powers is abolished, if those
limits do not confine the persons on whom they
are imposed, and if acts prohibited and acts
allowed, are of equal obligation. _It is a proposi-
tion too plain to be contested, that the constitu-
tion controls any legislative repugnant to it:
or, that the legislature may alter the constitution
by an ordinary act.

....Certainly all those who have
framed written constitutions contemplate them
as forming the fundamental and paramount law
of the nation, and consequently the theory of
every such government must be that an act of
the legislative repugnant to the constitution is
void.

that rule, If two conflict with each other
the courts must decide on the operation of each

So if a law be in opposition to the constitu-
tion; if both the law and the Constitution apply
to a particular case, so that the Court must either
decide the case conformably to the law disre
garding the constitution or conformably to the
constitution, disregarding the law; the court
must determine which of these conflicting rules
governs the case. This is of the very essence of
judicial duty.

If then the courts are to regard the constitu-
tion; and the constitution is superior to any ordi-
nary act of the legislature, the constitution, and
not such ordinary act, must govern the case to
which they both apply.

Those then who controvert the principle
that the constitution is to be considered in
Court as a paramount law are reduced to the 
necessity of maintaining that courts must close
their eyes on the constitution, and see only the
law.

This doctrine would subvert the very foun-
dation of all written constitution. It would
declare that an act, which, according to the prin-
ciples and theory of our government, is entirely
void, is yet, in practice, completely obligatory.
It would declare, that if the legislature shall do
what is expressly forbidden, such act, notwith-
standing the express prohibition, is in reality
effectual. It would be giving to the legislature a
practical and real omnipotence, with the same
breath which professes to restrict their powers
within narrow limits, It is prescribing limits and
declaring that those limits, may be passed _a
pleasure
That it thus reduces to nothing what we
have deemed the greatest improvement on
political institutions-a written constitution-
would of itself be sufficient, in America, where
written constitutions have been viewed with so
much reverence, for rejecting the constitution,
But the peculiar expressions of the constitution


            
            of the United States furnish additional anu-
ments in favour of its rejection,

The jndicial power of the United States is
extended to all cases arising under the constitu
tion
Could it be the intention of those who gave
this power to say that in using it he constitu
tion should not be looked into? That a case aris
ing under the constitution should be decided
without examining the instrument under which
it arise?
This is too extravagant to be maintained
It is also not entirely unworthy
of observation that in declaring what shall be
the supreme law of the land, the constitution
itself its first mentioned and not the laws of the 
United States generally, but those only which
shall be made in pursuance of the constitution.
have that rank,

Thus, the particular phraseology of the
constitution of the United States contirms and
Strengthens the principle, supposed to be essen-
tial to all written constitutions, that alaw repug-
nant to the constitution is void: and that courts
as Well as other departments, a te bound by that
instrument.” (The underlinings are mine)

(Quoted from Cases and Materials on Consti-
tutional Law By Professor John P Frank, 1952).

97. This logical argument of Chief Justice
John Marshall as propounded above is being accept-
ed all over the globe because it is the Constitution
which establishes the Institutions of the State with
limitations upon its functions, as such, those limita-
tions must be enforced along with its powers. Those
Institutions are Supreme, no doubt, so long those
remain within the bounds spelt out in the Constitu-
tion. The irresistible conclusion is th
cy of the Constitution is inherent in
given priority over all other laws.


98. Besides, the sovereignty of the State lies
with the ‘People’ and the Constitution has been
drawn up by the representatives of the people as the
embodiment of their will, Since the sovereignty of
the nation Hes with its people, so also its will. As
such, of necessity, the Constitution is the supreme
law of the State as the embodiment of the will of the
people, The Government being a mere Agent of the
‘People’, the laws made by it, must conform to the
Constitution as agent and trustee for and on behalf
of the people, The concept of the Supremacy of the
‘People’ as the supreme law giver has been recog-
nized tor the titst time in the United Stated when
they ratified their own Constitution in 1787 ang by
and by with almost all countries of the World with
democratic sprits ingrained in their Constitutions
Even in those countries where democracy exists
only in form and not in its true spirit, still the rulers
govern their countries although in-an autocratic and
feudalistic fashion but ironically again in the name
of the ‘People’ who has, in fret, no part in the
Government but in abusing their name their rulers
‘gover’ instead of ‘serve’ them,

99. The modern republican form of demo
cratic government is based on the concept of the
rights of the people to govern themselves through
their own elected representatives. Those representa:
tives are the agents of the people. They govern the
country for and on behalf of the people at large. But
those very ordinary people are the owners of the 
country and their such superiority is recognized in
the Constitution.

100. The ultimate superiority of the ‘People’ 
Was aptly stated by Alexander Hamilton in the 
Federalist in this manner:

“There is no position which depends on
clearer principles than that very act of a dele-
gated authority, contrary to the tenor of the
commission under which it is exercised, is void
No legislative act, therefore contrary to the
constitution can be valid. To deny this would be
to affirm than the deputy is greater that his prin
cipal that the servant is above his master, that
the representatives of the people are superior
the people themselves that man acting by


            
            virtue powers may do not only what their
powers do not authorize but what they forbid
......the Constitution ought to be preferred
to the Statute, the intention of the people to the
intention of their agents.” (Quoted from KC
wheare on Modern Constitutions at page 60).
 (The underlinings are mine)

101. It can be recalled what Justice Stanley
Mathews emphatically stated more then six score
years ago with regard to the sovereignty of the peo-
ple in the case of Yick Wo vs Peter Hopkins(1885)
118 US 356 (book 30 Law Ed) (370):

“When we consider the nature and the the-
ory of our institution of government, the princi-
ples upon which they are supposed to rest and
review the history of their development, we are
constrained to conclude that they do not mean
to leave room for the play and action of purely
personal and arbitrary power. Sovereignty itself
is, of course, not subject to law, for it is the
author and source of law: but in our system,
while sovereign powers are delegated to the
agencies of government, sovereignty itself
remains _with the people, by whom and_for
whom all government exists and acts. And the
law is the definition and limitation of power. It
is, indeed, quite true, that there must always be
lodged somewhere, and in some person. or body
the authority of final decision,. and, in many
cases of mere administration the responsibility
is purely political, no appeal lying except to the
ultimate tribunal ‘of the public judgment, exer-
cised either in the pressure of opinion or by
means of the suffrage. But the fundamental
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happi-
ness considered as individual possessions are
secure maxims of constitutional law which are
the moments showing the victorious progress
of the race, in securing to men the blessings of
civilization under the reign of just and equal
laws so that in the famous language of the
Massachusetts Bill of Rights, the Government
of the Commonwealth "may be a Government
of laws and not of men”, For, the very idea that
one man may be compelled to hold his life. or
the means of living, or any material right essen-
tial to the enjoyment of life, at the mere will of
another, seems to be intolerable in any country
where freedom prevails, as being the essence of
slavery itself."
In this connection Article 3. of Fourth French
Republic is worth reading on this point. It says:

‘National sovereignty “belongs to the
French people. No section of the people nor any
individual may assume its exercise. The people
exercise it in constitutional matters by the vote
of their representatives and by the referendum.
In all other matters they exercise it through their
deputies in the National Assembly, elected by
universal, equal, direct and secret suffrage.

(Quoted from KC Wheare on ‘Modern Consti-
tutions’ at page 62). (The underlinings are mine)

102. It appears that in this manner a Constitu-
tion after its enactment bind every body in the State
as the supreme law of the Republic. It binds and reg-
ulates not only the Institutions of the State which it
creates but also the very: ‘People’ of the Republic. It
may, no doubt,.be.amended but only by the special
procedure and manner spelt out in the Constitution
itself, Besides, such amendment:can only. be made
by the proper authority as enjoined-in the Constitu-
tion but not by any other person or group of persons
how high or powerful or mighty they may appear to
be, rather, it is to be, remembered that the Constitu-
tion is superior and greater and its shadow is much
taller and higher than even any of those mortals.

103. Pakistan and India became independent
in 1947. Although India framed its Constitution
promptly in 1950 but Pakistan has rather a turbulent
constitutional history. Its first Constitution was
framed in 1956 after much hustle and tussle. But this
was abrogated in 2(two) years in 1958. Martial Law
was proclaimed and the armed. forces took upon,
themselves the task of saviours of the nation.

104. In. 1962,. its second. Constitution -was
framed. This Constitution was also abrogated: in


            
            1969. However, following its first general election
in 1970, when the army rulers refused to convene
the National Assembly, the Bangalees in the erst-
while East Pakistan, declared their Independence,
leaving the West Pakistan on its own which is now
the Pakistan. In 1973, another Constitution was
made there. However, the supremacy of the Consti-
tution was also upheld by the judiciary in Pakistan
from time to time, atleast in theory.

105. Upholding the supremacy of the Consti-
tution, Hamoodur Rahman J (as his Lordship then
was), quoting Cooley, in the case of Fazlur Quader
Chowdhury vs Md Abdul Hoque PLD 1963 SC 486
= 18 DLR (SC) 69, held at page-535:

“A Constitution”, says Cooley in his
Treatise on Constitutional Limitations is “the
fundamental law of a State, containing the prin-
ciples upon which the Government is founded,
regulating the division of the sovereign powers,
and directing to what persons each of these
powers is to be confined, and the manner in
which it is to be exercised.” The fundamental
principle underlying a written Constitution is
that it not only specifies the persons or authori-
ties in whom the sovereign powers of the State
are to be vested but also lays down fundamen-
tal rules for the selection or appointment of
such persons or authorities and above all fixes
the limits of the exercise of those powers. Thus
the’ written Constitution is_the source from
which all governmental power emanates and it
defines its scope and_ambi hat each fune-
tionary should act within his respective sphere,
NO power can therefore be claimed by any
fctionary which is not to be found withint the
four corners of the Constitution nor can anyone
transgress the limits therein specified,”

(The underlinings are mine)

106. By way of example his Lordship held as
follows at page-534-35 :

“It is no doubt true that the Constitution
was enacted by the President, as stated in the
Preamble, in exercise of the Mandate given to

him by the people of Pakistan, But once the
Constitution had been enacted, he became
under Article 226 (1) read with Article 227 (1)
the first President of Pakistan under the
Constitution, and, after he had taken the oath of
office under the Constitution to act faithfully in
accordance with the Constitution and to pre-
serve, protect and defend the Constitution his
powers became circumscribed by the provi-
sions of the Constitution and he could do no
more than what the Constitution empowered
him to do.

107. In India, the Constitution was framed in
1949. Although, it was amended from time to time
by the proper authority as enjoined in its constitu-
tion but it was neither abrogated nor Suspended by
any ‘Supra-Constitutional authority’, No Wonder 
democracy in its real spirit has taken sure and pro-
nounced roots in India.

108. The judiciary also performs its functions 
‘in defending and upholding the Constitution as is
required of them. The Supreme Court of India
upheld the supremacy of the Constitution in no
uncertain terms in many of its decisions . In the case
of Golak Nath vs State of Punjab AIR 1967 SC 1643,
K Subba Rao CJ, held at para-15, Page-1655:

“The Objective sought to be achieved by
the Constitution is declared in sonorous terms
in its preamble which reads:

“We the people of India have solemnly
resolved to constitute India into a Sovereign
Democratic Republic and to secure to all its cit-
izens justice, liberty, equality and fraternity.”

It contains in a nutshell its ideals and its
aspiration. The preamble is not a platitude but
the mode of its realisation is worked out in
detail in the Constitution. The Constitution
brings into existence different Constitutional
entities, namely the Union the States and the
Union Territories. It creates three major instru-
ments of power, namely Legislature, the
Executive and Judiciary, Noauthority created
under the Constitution is supreme' the
            
            Constitution is Supreme an all the authorities
function under the supreme law of the land. The
rule of law under the Constitution has a glorious
content. It embodies the modern concept of law
evolved over the centuries...It, therefore, pre-
serves the natural rights against the State
encroachment and constitutes the higher judici-
ary of the State as the sentinel of the said rights
and the balancing wheel between the rights,
subject to social control.."
(The underlinings are mine)

109. The Indian Supreme Court also recog-
nizes the superiority and permanence of the Consti-
tuional provisions. In the above noted Golak Nathi’s
case Subba Rao CJ held Para-44, Page-1666 :

“There is an essential distinction between
Constitution and Statutes. Comparatively
speaking. Constitution is permanent: it is an
organic_statute; it grows by its own inherent
force. The Constitutional concepts are couched
in elastic terms. Courts are expected to and
indeed should interpret, its terms without doing
violence to the language to suit the expanding
needs of the society.”

(The underlinings are mine)

The above discussions on the Constitutional
positions in the United Kingdom, the United States,
and India, show that in the United Kingdom the
supremacy of the Parliament at West Minister is
firmly established,after a long struggle with the
enactment of the Bill of Rights, 1689. The inde-
pendence of judiciary was achieved in the Act of
Settlement, 1700. The laws as passed by the Parlia-
ment and interpreted by the judiciary, are of
Universal application in the United Kingdom and all
are bound by those laws, The Constitutional
Conventions, although are not laws but are the main
plank and bulwarks of the Constitution of the United
Kingdom.

110. On the other hand, the United States of
America, has a rigid Constitution, In pursuance to
the provisions of this Instrument all three major
Institutions came into being. The Legislature, the
Executive and the Judiciary, all works within the
ambit of the Constitution. In the United States, the
Constitution is Supreme and all the Institutions are
bound by it. Any law made by the Legislature or any
action taken by the Executive, in derogation to the
Constitution, becomes void to that extent.

111. Similar is the Constitutional position in
India. It has also a rigid Constitution which is. the
supreme law and all other laws and the Institutions
must conform to it.

Part XVII
The Constitution of Bangladesh »

112... We have made -a: detailed. discussions
above on the concept of Constitution and its supre-
macy because the issues involved in this Rule is
with regard to the Constitution of Bangladesh vis-a-
vis the Proclamations and its legality or validity.

113. _ Keeping in view the above noted legal
position as discussed above let us now consider the
Constitution of Bangladesh. It begins’ with’ the
Preamble. zs tora t

114. It may be reiterated that the independ-
ence of Bangladesh was declared on the night fol-
lowing 25th March, 1971 and independence was
achieved on 16th December, 1971. Within less than
one year, the Constitution of Bangladesh, was made
on November 4, 1972. It was definitely a great feat
by any standard. na dies

Part XVII(A)
Preamble of the Constitution ,

115... The. Constitution . starts with the
Preamble.
“Let us first look’at the original Preamble of our
Constitution.

“The Preamble is divided in five paragraphs. In
the first paragraph, it stated how Bangladesh came
into being, In the Second paragraph it stated the fun-
damental basis of the nation-hood of Bangladesh. In

            
            the third-paragraph, it spelt out the lofty ideals and
the ultimate goal of the state for its citizens. The
fourth paragraph affirms that it is the sacred duty of
the people of Bangladesh to maintain the supremacy
of the Constitution. The fifth paragraph proclaimed
the adoption of the Constitution by the people of
Bangladesh.

This preamble may be compared with the
Magna Carta or the preamble of the Bill of Rights,
1689.

It embodies and proclaimed in emphatical terms
our historical war of liberation, our aims, objects,
ideals and the ultimate goals in establishing the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh.

The preamble sets out the ideological aspira-
tions of the people of Bangladesh. The essential fea-
tures of the grand concepts spelt out in the Preamble
are delineated and studded in various provisions of
the Constitution.

This preamble is the key and the silver gate to
our sacred Constitution. It is comparable only to the
preamble of the Constitution of the United States of
America but as a matter of fact its impact is deeper
and wider.

In this connection it should be noted that from
earlier days preamble in a statute in England was
regarded with great importance. It is treated as
guides to its construction. It gives an idea about the
back-ground purport, objects and subject-matter of
the Act in question.

116. It also gives the scope of the statute in

Lord Halsbury LC in Income Tax Commis-
sioners vs Pemsel (1891) AC 531 approved the
observation of Dyer CJ in Stowel vs Lord Zouch,
made in respect of preamble that it is a key to open
the minds of the makers of the Act (at page-543).

117. In considering the Betting Act, 1853, AL
Smith LJ, observed in the case of Powell vs
Kempton Park Racecourse Company (1897) OB 242
CA at page-271.


'........when I turn to the preamble
of the Act which in my opinion must first be
read, there is no obscurity as to what the
Legislature aimed at when it passed the Act in 
question.”

On consideration of the effect of the Preamble
his Lordship further held at page-272-3: .

“Now what effect has the preamble of an
Act of Parliament when the Act has to be con-
strued? I do not doubt that, if the words Of the
enacting part of an Act of Parliament are clear
and unambiguous, they must. be construed
according to their ordinary meaning, even
 although by so doing the Act is extended
beyond what is shewn to be its object by its pre.
amble. But the preamble must always play an
important part in the construction of a statute,
Dyer CJ calls the preamble of a statute “a key to
open the minds of the makers of the Act and the
mischief which they intended to redress” -
Stowel v. Lord Zouch.......... ”

118. In construing the Cinematograph. Act,
1909, Lord Alvrstone CJ observed in respect of pre-
amble in the case of London County. Council vs 
Bermondsey Bioscope Company Ltd. (1911) IKB 
445 at page-451: .

“I quite recognize that the title of an Act is
part of the Act, and that it is of importance as 
shewing the purview of the Act; and I may
express in this connection my regret that the
practice of inserting preambles in Acts of Par-
liament has been discontinued, as they were
often of great assistance to the Courts in con
struing the Acts.” (The underlinings are mine)

119. The Craies on. Statute Law, Seventh
Edition (1971) explains the object of preamble thus
at page-199: 

“Preambles, especially in the earlier Acts
have been regarded as of great importance as
guides to construction. They were to set out the
facts or state of the law. for which it was pro-
posed to legislate by the statute.”

            
            Coke was quoted in the said book at page-200:
"The preamble of the statue" said Coke,
is a good means to find out the meaning of the
statue and as it were a key to open the under-
standing thereof."

120. In kesavananda Bharati vs State of
Kerala AIR 1973 SC 1461, in highlighting the
importance of preamble, SM Sikri CJ, held at para
“92, page-1501
 "92 I may here trace the history of the
shaping of the Preamble because this would
show that the Preamble was in conformity with
the Constitution as it was finally accepted. Not
only was the Constitution framed in the light of
the Preamble but the Preamble was ultimately
settled in the light of the Constitution.”

121. Holding the preamble as the part of the
Constitution, his Lordship held at para-102, page-
1503 :

“102. With respect the Court was wrong in
holding as has been shown above, that the
Preamble is not a part of the Constitution unless
the Court was thinking of the distinction bet-
ween the Constitution Statute and the Constitu-
tion mentioned by Mr Palkhivala. It was
expressly voted to be a part of the Constitu-
tion.” 

122. Sikri CJ, again held at para-121, page-
"121. It seems to me that the Preamble of
our Constitution is of extreme importance and
the constitution should be read and interpreted
in the light of the grand and noble vision
expressed in the Preamble.”

123. In Anwar Hossain Chowdhury etc. vs
Bangladesh 1989 BLD (Spl) 1, MH Rahman J (as
his Lordship then was) highlights the importance of
Preamble thus:

"443.............. The validity of the impugned
amendment may be examined, with or without
resorting to the doctrine of basic feature, on the
touchstone of the Preamble itself.”

124. His Lordship, however, in his opinion
approved the following observations of Shelat and
Grover, JJ, in Kesavanada Bharati’ case at para-
453-455, page-173 :

“453..... Shelat and Grover JJ observed in
_Kesavanand AIR 1973 SC 1461. “The Consti-
tution makers gave to the preamble the pride of
place. It embodied in a solemn form all the
ideals and aspirations for which the country had
struggled....It is not without significance that
the Preamble was passed only after draft arti-
cles of the Constitution had been adopted with
such modifications as were approved by the
Constituent Assembly. The Preamble was,
therefore, meant to embody in a very few and
well defined words the key to the understanding
of the Constitution” .....

454. At para 537 of the report the learned
Judges said:

“The Preamble serves several important
purposes. Firstly it indicates the source from |
which the Constitution comes viz. the people of
India. Next it. contains the enacting clause
which brings into force the Constitution. In the
third place, it declares the great rights and free-
doms which the people of India intended to
secure to all citizens and the basic type of gov-
ernment and polity which was to be established.
From all these, if any provision in the Consti-
tution had to be interpreted and. if the expres-
sions .used therein. were. ambiguous, the
Preamble would certainly furnish. valuable
guidance in the matter, particularly when the
question is of the correct ambit, scope and
width of a power.intended to be conferred by
Art: 368" 6 casi :

455. At para 539. of the report the learned
Judges referred to Story: “While dealing with
the Preamble to the United States Constitution
it-was observed by Story (Commentaries on the
“Constitution of the United States, 1833 edition,

            
            Volume J), that the Preamble was not adopted as
a mere formulary; but as a solemn at promulgation
of a fundamental fact, vital to the character and
operations of the Government. Its true office is
to expound the nature and extent and applica-
tion of the powers actually conferred by the
Constitution and not substantially to create
them”.

As such, it goes without much ado that the pre-
amble to our Constitution depicts in brief the back-
ground of our liberation, the basis of our nation-
hood, the objectives and duties of the people of
Bangladesh in a very precise manner.

125. The first paragraph of the original
Preamble of the Constitution of Bangladesh reads as
follows :

“We, the people of Bangladesh having pro-
claimed our independence on the 26th day of
March, 1971 and through a historic struggle for
national liberation established, the independent,
Sovereign People’s Republic of Bangladesh.;”

126. This is how the people of Bangladesh,
through their elected representatives, who formed
the Constituent Assembly, approved the Proclama-
tion of independence on the 26th March 197] and
establishment of Bangladesh. :

The fourth paragraph of the Preamble reads as fol-
lows :

“Affirming that it is our sacred duty to
safeguard, protect and defend this Constitution
and to maintain its supremacy as the embodi-
ment of the will of the people of Bangladesh so
that we may Prosper in freedom and may make
our full contribution towards international
peace and co-operation in keeping with the pro-
gressive aspirations of mankind”

This portion of the preamble very clearly
without any ambiguity spells out and cast a sacred
duty upon the people of Bangladesh to safeguard,
Protect and defend its Constitution and also to main-
tain its Supremacy. This paragraph projects the
doubtless Supremacy of the Constitution and also

the unshakable duty of all persons in Bangladesh
uphold it over every Institutions and functionaries it
created. The preamble is a part of the Constitution
and it in a nutshell declares jts highest Place of
importance. Generally, a written constitution, as dis
cussed above, being the supreme law, all other laws
must conform to it, still in order to Spell out any
doubts the preamble of our Constitution highlights
the supremacy and paramountcy of the Constitution
over all other laws without any exception,


127. This expression and spirit Ordained in
our Constitution has a remarkable similarity to what
President Abraham Lincoln said seven SCore years 
ago in his famous address at Gettysburg in 1863 that
the Government of the United States being a gov.
ernment of the people, by the people and for the
people would not perish from the earth,

128. The said speech delivered on November
19, 1863 at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, reads as fol-
lows:

“Four score and seven ‘years ago our
fathers brought forth on this continent, a new
nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to
the proposition that all men are created equal,

Now we are engaged in a great civil war,
testing whether that nation, or any: nation so
conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. 
We are met on a great battle-field of that war.
We have come to dedicate a_ portion of that 
field, as a final resting place for those who here
gave their lives that the nation might live. It is 
altogether fitting and proper that we should do
this. But, in a larger sense, we can not dedicate
 We can not consecrate — we can not hallow
— this ground. The brave men, living and dead,
who _struggled here, have consecrated it, far
above our poor power to_add_or detract. The
world will little note. nor long remember what
We say here, but it can never forget what they
did here, It is for us the living, rather, to be ded-
icated here to the unfinished work which they
Who fought here have thus far so nobly
advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicat


            
            ed to the great task remaining before us that
from these honored dead we take increased
devotion to that cause for which they gave the
last full measure of devotion that we here
highly resolve that these dead shall not have
died in vain that this nation under God shall
have a new birth of freedom and that govern
ment of the people by the people for the peo
ple shall not perish from the earth


129. The Preamble of our Constitution eulo-
gizes the lofty and holy ideals and spirit of the mak-
ers of the Constitution. In framing the Constitution
they kept in mind those who gave their life and
blood for the violent birth of Bangladesh and tried to
uphold their ideals of liberation and independence
which came about in the path silted with their blood
and toil. The independence was not given in a silver
platter. It was earned at the cost of many thousands
of lives and tears of innumerable mothers and wid-
ows. The Freedom Fighters ungrudgingly gave their
lives knowing full well that they might never see the
liberation of Bangladesh still they made their
supreme sacrifice with their last and solemn hope
that others may live in an independent country, a
country where their own Bangalee nationalism
would flourish in a socialistic secular society,
emblemed with democratic principles.


130. The freedom fighters fought against the
mllitarily superior Pakistan army, they also fought
against their Bengali vasals and compatriots who
fiendishly fought against the liberation of Bangla-
desh.They wanted an independent Bangladesh and
to get rid of the Pakistan army and their compatriots
once for all. Those freedom fighters are the real
architects of the Republic of Bangladesh and their
ideals must be respected, honoured and be given
utmost importance. The framers of the Constitution
is framing the constitution tried to visualize. and
feel their death agony in bringing Bangladesh into
existence through the process of its violent birth.

131. T his is how Bangladesh was liberated
and independence was achieved against unfathomed
odds which cannot now even be imagined. As such
every one in the Republic, from the highest func-
tionary to the lowest, must ingrain in their hearts
that the liberation struggle itself is the cornerstone
of the Republic of Bangladesh and its Constitution.
This was also judicially recognized in the case of the
Registrar, University of Dacca vs Dr Syed Sajjad
Hussain 34 DLR AD BH Chowdhury J (as his
Lordship then was) observed at para-37, page-18:

'..liberation struggle is the corner
stone of our constitution, As the preamble
begins ‘we, the people of Bangladesh, having
proclaimed our independence on the 26th day
of March, 1971 and through a historic war for
national independence established the inde-
pendent, sovereign People’s Republic of
Bangladesh. By Proclamations Order No. | of
1977 amendment was made and previous to the
amendment it read ‘ a historic struggle for
national liberation”. The historic struggle for
national liberation is not only eulogized but in
optative manner it was raised to the level of
“historic war for national independence.” 1971
period was one phase but the struggle continues
because fundamental aim of the state is to
realisé a society in which the rule of law, fun-
damental human rights and freedom, equality
and justice and in that view the Constitution has
laid down the fundamental principles of state
policy”. Though the. preamble to. the
Constitution was amended as_ aforesaid,
clause(b) of paragraph 5 remained same and
any_attempt to redicule or belittle “liberation
struggle” _or “creation of Bangladesh” is con-
demned'
We also join to add that any attempt to truncate
any of the fundamental principles and basic features
of the Constitution is condemned and deprecated.

132. The framers of the Constitution kept in
mind all these sad saga and the test of fire which the
Bangalees went through while liberating their coun-
try at the time of framing of the Constitution. They
knew. that,a time may come when the black shadow

            
            of the horrendous past may even make a return in
future to engulf the nation all over again in various
evil disguises, as such, in their wisdom emphatical-
ly spelt out the intentions of the real architects of
this Republic in the original Preamble in this man-
ner :

The English Text is :

PREAMBLE

“We, the people of Bangladesh having 
proclaimed our Independence on the 26th day
of March 1971 and, through a historic struggle
for national liberation, established the Indepen.
dent, sovereign People’s Republic of Bangla.
desh;

Pledging that the high ideals of national.
ism, socialism, democracy and Secularism,
which inspired our heroic people to dedicate
themselves to, and our brave martyrs to sacri.
fice their lives in, the national liberation strug.
gle, shall be the fundamental principles of the
Constitution; , :

Further pledging that it shall be a funda-
mental aim of the State to realise through the
democratic process a socialist society, free from
exploitation — a society in which the rule of law,
fundamental human rights and freedom, equali-
ty and justice, political, economic and social,
will be secured for all citizens;

Affirming that it is our sacred duty to safe-
guard, protect and defend this Constitution and
to maintain its supremacy as the embodiment of
the will of the people of Bangladesh so that we
may prosper in freedom and may make our full
contribution towards international peace. and
co-operation in keeping with the. progressive
aspirations of mankind;

In our Constituent Assembly, this eigh-
teenth day of Kartick 1379 BS, corresponding 
to the fourth day of November 1972 AD..do
hereby adopt, enact and give to ourselves this
Constitution,” (The underlinings are mine)

This was the dream of the true architects of this
Republic who made supreme sacrifices for its emer
gence. This being the intentions of the architects of
the Constitution also and that the ‘pole-star in the
Construction of a Constitution is the intention of its
makers and adopters’ as aptly’ observed by “Ohio
Judge in the case of HM Co vs Miller (92) Ohio 5


            
            115. The said observation was also cited with
approved by Nuhammad Munir CJ in the Reference
by the President of Pakistan PLD 1957 SC 219 (235)
9 DLR (1957) SC 178 (188). So also MH Rahman
I in Anwar Hossain Chowdhury’s case, in holding
the preamble as part of the Constitution, observed at
pura-456 page-173-4:
"456, After referring to the Proclamation of
independence on 26th day March, 1971, the
war of national independence and the principles
of nationalism, democracy and socialism for
which our brave martyrs sacrificed their lives
the makers of the Constitution in the name of
“We, the people” declared the fundamental
principles of the Constitution and the funda-
mental aims of the State......... If any provision
can be called the pole star of the Constitution
then it is the Preamble.”
(The underlinings are mine)

Part XVII (B)
Supremacy of the Constitution

133. In commensurate with the noble visions
spelt out in the preamble, Article 7 proclaims that all
powers in the Republic belong to the people of
Bangladesh and the Constitution being the solemn
expression of their will, is the supreme law of the
Republic. Article 7 reads as follows:

7. (1) All powers in the Republic belong to the
 people, and their exercise on behalf of the
people shall be effected only under, and
by the authority of this Constitution.

(2) This Constitution is, as the solemn
expression of the will of the people, the
supreme law of the Republic, and if any
other law is inconsistent’ with this
ee Constitution that other law shall, to the
extent of the inconsistency, be void.

Article 7(1) emphatically proclaims that all
powers of the Republic belong to the people and
their exercise on their behalf shall be effected only
under and by the authority of this Constitution. =
Article 7(2) is equally significant. It proclaimed
that the Constitution is the Supreme Law of the
Republic being the solemn expression of the will of
the people that any other law which is inconsistent
with the Constitution that other law shall, to that
extent of the inconsistency, be void.

Article 7 is an unique one and is not found in
any other Constitution. It emphatically without any
ambiguity, declares the supremacy of the
Constitution in no uncertain terms.

134. In the case of Md Shoib vs Government of
Bangladesh 27 DLR 315, this concept has been
noticed. DC Bhattacharya J held at para-20, p-325 :

“In a country run under a written Constitu-
tion, the Constitution is the source of all powers
of the executive organs, of the State as well as
of the other’ organs, the Constitution having
manifested the sovereign will of the people. As
it.has. been made clear in article 7 of the
Constitution of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh that the Constitution being ‘the
solemn expression of the will of the people. is
the Supreme law of the Republic and all powers
of the Republic and their exercise shall be
effected only under, and by the authority of, the
Constitution. This is a basic concept on which
the modern states have been built up.”
(The underlinings are mine)

This Article 7 is the touch-stone in the con-
struction of the Constitution which provides for
undoubted supremacy of the Constitution.

135. ‘In the case of /989 Anwar Hossain
Chowdhury vs Bangladesh BLD (Spl) !, BH Chow-
dhury J (as his Lordship then was) analysed Article
7 in this manner at para-52, page-60:

On analysis the Article reveals the follow-
ing:
(a) All powers in the Republic belong to
"the people. This is the concept of sov-
-ereignty of the people. This echoes
the words of the proclamation “by the

            
            mandate given to us by the people of
Bangladesh whose will is supreme”.

(b) This exercise on behalf of the people
shall be effected only under, and by
the authority of this Constitution.
Limited government with three organ
performing designated functions is
envisaged. In the Proclamation it was
said the President “shall exercise all
the Executive and Legislative powers
of the Republic” “till such time as
Constitution is framed” and he will
“do all other things that may be nec-
essary to give to the. people of
Bangladesh an orderly and just
Government. Hence separation of
Powers emerges as a necessary corol-
lary of designated functions;

(c) Supreme Law of the Republic. That
points to supremacy of the Constitu-
tion because;

(d) Any law is void to the extent of incon-
sistency with the Supreme Law (i.e.
the Constitution) which therefore con-
templates judiciary;

(e) Supreme Court with plenary judicial
power for maintenance of the supre-
macy of the Constitution”.

His Lordship further held at para-149-150,
page-84 :

“149. Our Article 7 has reflected the wis-
dom of the past and the learning of the history.
Therefore, it has said categorically:

(1) All powers in the Republic belong to the
people—this is a concept of sovereign-
ty of the people. Sovereignty lies with
the people not with executive, legisla-
ture or judiciary—all these three are
creations of the Constitution itself.

(2) They are exercised on behalf of the peo-
ple shall be an effected only, under, and
held by the authority of the Constitution
This is the concept of limited Gover.
ment based on theory of Separation of
powers and then Article 7(2)says sig.
nificantly that this Constitution is, as the
solemn expression of the will of the
people, the supreme law of the Republic
This is the supreme law not in theory
because it says "if any other law is
inconsistent with this Constitution that
other law shall, to the extent of the
inconsistency, be void”,


150. Law as defined in Article 152 means
any Act, ordinance, orders rule and regulations
bye-law notification or-other legal instruments
and any custom or usage having the forces in
law in Bangladesh. Article 7 says that if any law
is inconsistent with the Constitution that law
shall to the extent of inconsistency be void,
When Article 26 says about the inconsistency of
any law with the fundamental right to be void,
Article 7 operates in the whole jurisdiction to
say that any law and that law includes also any
amendment of the Constitution itself because
Article 142 says that amendment can be made
by Act of Parliament. Therefore if any amend-
ment which is an Act of Parliament contravenes
any express provision of the Constitution that
amendment act is liable to'be declared, void, So
says Article 7, But by whom this declaration is,
to be made? It is the executive which initiates
the proposal for law. It is the legislature that
passes the law. Then who will consider_the
validity or otherwise of the law-obviously the 
judiciary.”

His Lordship further approved the contention of 
Mr Syed Ishtiaq Ahmed, at para-198, page-97, that
Article 7 stands like a statue of liberty.

136, Mustafa Kamal J (as his Lordship then
was) in Kudrat-e-Elahi.Panir vs Bangladesh 44
DLR (AD) 319, in acknowledging. its importance
helo at pera-72, that Article 7(1) says that all powers
in the Republic belong to the people.

            
            137. In this manner Article 7 declares the
supremacy of the Constitution as stated in the fourth
paragraph of the Preamble.

138. The second paragraph of the Preamble in
the original Constitution, spells out the high ideals
of the Republic This paragraph reads as follows:

“pledging that the high ideals of national-
ism, socialism, democracy and secularism,
which inspired our heroic people to dedicate
themselves to, and our brave martyrs to sacri-
fice their lives in, the national liberation strug-
gle, shall be the fundamental principles of the
Constitution;”

Our Liberation War was fought on these high
ideals of nationalism, socialism, democracy and sec-’
iarism. These high ideals inspired our heroic peo-
ple to dedicate themselves and our brave martyrs to
sacrifice their lives in the national liberation strug-
gle.

139. Those high ideals are the basis of our
nation-hood and the framers of the Constitution had
the foresight to apprehend that this country might
not always be served by wise consciences and true
patriotic persons, rather, might sometimes be gov-
emed by ‘wicked men, ambitious of power, with
hafted of liberty and contempt of law’ (Justice in ex
parte Milligan) who, in their self-interest, may do
away with the above noted high ideals of our mar-
tyrs, as such, in their wisdom, ‘spelt out those high
ideals both in the Preamble and also in Article 8(1)
the Constitution So that those fundamental prin-
ciples shall remain permanently as the guiding prin-
ciples and as the ever lasting light house for our
Republic the original Article 8(1) reads as follows:

The English version is :

“8, (1) The principles of nationalism, social-
ism, democracy _and__ secularism,
together with the principles derived
from them as set out in this Part, shall
constitute the fundamental_principles
of State policy.

(2) The principles set out in this Part shall be
fundamental to the governance of
Bangladesh, shall be applied by the
State in the making of laws, shall be a
guide to the interpretation of the
Constitution and of the other laws of
Bangladesh, and shall form the basis of
the work of the State and of its citizens,
but shall not be judicially enforce-
able.” (The underlinings are mine)

The apprehensions of the framers of the
Constitution proved to be right. In 1975, Martial
Law was imposed in the country and brick by brick,
the various provisions of the Constitution was
wrecked by the usurpers. The Second paragraph of
the Preamble, the Article 8 and many other
Provisions containing the fundamental principles of
the Stale Policy was deleted on April 23, 1977, by
the Proclamations (Amendment) Order, 1977
(Proclamation Order No.1 of 1977), proclaimed by
Major General Ziaur Rahman, BU psc, the President
and the Chief Martial Law Administrator of Bangla-
desh. !
140. If we hark back to.the history we would
find that the Civil War of 186] in the United States
threatened its very existence as one nation. It
engulfed the entire country. War went on in almost -
every where in the country with bleak prospect for
survival — of the States as united with their

            
            Constitution. Nobody could blame the President of
the United States or others in that precarious and
catastrophic situation if the Constitution of the
country was pushed to the back-seat due to the said
extreme emergency but even in that critical situation
the citizens of the North upheld the high ideals of
democratic principles and did not at all compromise
and give in to the inhuman demands of the
Southerners, for allowing slavery in the country in
violation of the principles of liberty and equality, as
enshrined in the Constitution, rather, they held the
Constitution high above everything and fought with
their lives to free the slaves in vindication of the
rights guaranteed under the Constitution.

141. Although there was serious controversy
all over the country on the issue of slavery but even
in such a trying moment, no proclamation declaring
Martial Law was made. Instead, their lawfully elect-
ed President gave this message to the Congress on
July 4, 1861, on the out break of the Civil War :

“It presents to the whole family of man the
question whether a constitutional republic or
democracy—a_government of the people by the
same people—can or cannot maintain its terri-
torial integrity against its own domestic foes. It
presents the question whether discontented
individuals, too few in numbers to control
administration according to organic law in any
case, can always, upon the pretences made in
this case or any other pretences, or arbitrarily
without any pretence, break up their govern-
ment and thus practically put an end to free
government upon the earth._It forces us to ask:
‘Is there, in all republics, this inherent and fatal
weakness ? Must a government, of necessity, be
too strong for the liberties of its own people, or
too weak to maintain its own existence?”

(Quoted from KC Wheare: Modern Constitu-
tions, Second Edition, 1966, page-142).

142. Even the Supreme Court did not relent
in that horrendous situation when the battles were
fought everywhere but upheld the Constitution. In
the case of ex parte Milligan (1866), Justice Davis,
in delivering the opinion of the Court held :
"This nation as experience has proved
cannot always remain at peace and has no right
to expect that it will always have wise and
humane rulers sincerely attached to the princi
ples of the Constitution, wicked men, ambitious
of pewer with hatred of liberty and contempt of
law may fill the place once occupied by
Washington and Lincoln; and if this right is con-
template. If our fathershad failed to provide for
just such a contingency they would have been
false to the trust reposed in them. They knew-
the history of the world told them—the nation
they were founding, be its existence short or
long, would be involved in war; how often or
how long continued, human foresight could not
tell; and that_unlimited power, wherever lodged
at_such_a time, was _especiall hazardous to
freemen. For this, and other equally weigh rea.
sons, they secured the inheritance they had
fought to maintain, by incorporating in a written |
constitution the safeguards which time had |
proved were essential to its preservation. Not one |.
of these safeguards can the President, of |.
Congress, or the Judiciary disturb, except the one :
concerning the writ of habeas corpus.

..knowing this, they limited the suspen-
sion to one great right, and left the rest to
remain forever inviolable. But, it is insisted that
the safety of the country in time of war
demands that this broad claim for martial law}
shall be sustained. If this were true, it could be}
well said that a country, preserved at the sacri- 5
fice of all the cardinal_principles of liberty, is}
not worth the cost of preservation. Happily. itis |
not so.”........, (Quoted from Professor John P.}
Frank on; Cases And Materials on Constitu
tional Law (1952 Revision) at page 263-64)
(The underlinings are mine)

143. Let us now see what our Supreme Court
says about the Constitution. As early as in 1973. in
the case of AT Mridha vs State 25 DLR 335, Badrul
Haider Chowdhury-J (as his Lordship then was) held
at para-10 page-344: _

            
            "In order to build up an egalitarian society
for which tremendous sacrifice was made by
the youth of this country in the national libera-
tion movement, the Constitution emphasises for
building up society free from exploitation of
man by man so that people may find the mean-
ing of life. After all, the aim of the Constitution
is the aim of human happiness. The Constitu-
tion is the supreme law_and all laws are to be
tested the touch stone of the Constitution
(vide article 7). It is the supreme law because it
exists because the Will of the people is
reflected in it.

144. In the case of Anwar Hossain Chow-
dhury etc VS Bangladesh (Popularly known as the
Constitution 8th Amendment case) 1989 BLD (Spl)
|, Shahabuddin Ahmed J ( as his Lordship then
was), held at para-272, page-118:

“In this case we are to interpret a Constitu-
tion which is referred to, as the will of the peo-
ple and supreme law of the land and as such it
isa most important instrument. But its pre-emi-
nence is not derived only from the fact that it is
the supreme law of the land; it is pre-eminent
because it contains lofty principles and is based
on much higher values of human life. On the
one hand, it gives out-lines of the State appara-
tus, on the other hand, it enshrines_long cher-
ished hopes _and_aspirations of the people: it
glves guarantees of fundamental rights of a cit-
izen and also makes him aware of his solemn
duty to himself, to his fellow citizen and to his
country ... (The underlinings are mine)
From a reading of the above Judgements, it
would show that nobody denied the supremacy of
the Constitution, Even the Attorney-General accept-
ted the supremacy of the Constitution, and so also the

145.  In the instant case, it is alleged that the
solemn Change Constitution of Bangladesh were freely
changed by the Proclamations, MLRs and MLOs,
issued by self-appointed or nominated Presi-
dents and CMLAs, in their whims and caprices. The
learned Additional Attorney-General although did
not support Justice Sayem but half-heatedly
attempted to justify the actions taken by Khondaker
Moshtaque Ahmed and Major General Ziaur
Rahman, BU psc. but when we specifically asked
him to show us any Constitutional or legal provision
in justification of the seizure of State—Power of the
Republic, he was without any answer although he
mumbled from time to time about the Fourth
Amendment.

146. Mr Akhter Imam, Advocate, however, in
support of Martial Law, contended that.in our coun-
try.a Martial Law culture or Martial Law jurispru-
dence has been evolved. He based his argument
partly on the book ‘Bangladesh Constitution: Trends
And Issues’ by Justice Mustafa Kamal. The learned
Advocate, read extensively from the said book and
argued that whether we like it or not we can neither
avoid nor overlook the long shadows of Marshals.
They are there and it is better to acknowledge them.

We have given our utmost consideration to
the above submission of Mr Akhter Imam but
found no substance. Rather we must acknowl-
edge that we no longer live in the era of Henry
VIII, Lois XIV or even Napoleon Bonaparte,
whose words were law. But we live in the 21st
century. Now the voice of the people, however .
feeble, is the first as well as the last word. Their
will is the supreme law. The Constitution guar-
antees it, so also the Court and every body must
follow this principle without any exception, in
this Twenty First Century.

Part XVIII
Defence Services

147. Our defence services trace their history
from the former British Colonial Regime in British
India. A brief look in its historical back-ground may |
be educative in order to understand and appreciate
the constitutional position of the defence services in:
its proper perspective.

148. A thousand years ago, the. King of
England used to rule his Kingdom by Divine right. .

            
            As the fountain of justice, he was the first
Magistrate of the Realm and used to run his
Kingdom mainly by Royal Decrees and preroga-
tives. The King was also the Commander-in-Chief
of his army and also the defender of faith. As such,
all the main functions of the Kingdom were fused in
the Sovereign. The King used to resolve all matters
of importance with Curia Regis or the Great Council
of the Realm.

149. In 1215, the Barons of the Realm pre-
sented their Charter of demands to King John. The
King, after some deliberations, accepted the Articles
of the Barons which were embodied in the Great
Charter, known as the Magna Carta, at Runnymede
on June 15, 1215.

150. The Bill of Rights, 1689, prohibited the
maintenance of a standing army by the Crown in
peacetime without the consent of Parliament. AV
Dicey, in his ‘An Introduction to the Study of the
Law of the Constitution’ Tenth Edition, 1973, con-
sidered the legal position of the army in the United
Kingdom in this manner at page-299:

“The position of the army, in fact, was
determined by an adherence.on the part of the
authors of the first Mutiny: Act to the funda-
mental principle of English law, that a soldier
may, like a clergyman, incur special obligations
in_his_official_ character, but is_not_thereby
exempted from the ordinary liabilities of citi-
zenship,

The object and principles of the first
Mutiny Act of 1689 are exactly the same as the
object and principles of the Army Act, under
which the English army is in substance now
governed. A comparison of the two statutes
shows at a glance what are the means by which
the maintenance of military discipline has been
reconciled with the maintenance of freedom, or,
to use a more accurate expression, with the
supremacy of the law of the land........ ..... "a
person subject to military law,” stands in a two-
fold relation: the one is his relation towards his
fellow-citizens outside the army; the other is his
relation towards the members of the army and
especially towards his military superiors any
man, in short, subject to military law has duties
and rights as a citizen as well as duties and rights
as a soldier. His position in each respect is under
English Law governed by definite Principles

A soldier’ position as a citizen —The
fixed doctrine of English law is that a Soldier
though a member of a standing army, is in
England subject to all the duties and liabilities
of an ordinary citizen.

“Nothing in this Act contained” (so runs
the first Mutiny Act) “shall extend or be con.
strued to exempt “any officer or soldier whatso.
ever from the ordinary “process of law”,

These words contain the clue to all our leg.
islation with regard to the standing army whilst
employed in the United Kingdom. A soldier by |
his_contract_of enlistment undertakes many
obligations in addition to the duties incumbent
upon a civilian. But he does not escape from
any of the duties of an ordinary British subject, |

The results of this principle are traceable 
throughout the Mutiny Acts. 

A soldier is subject to the same criminal 
liability as a civilian. He may when in the 
British dominions be put on trial before any
competent “civil” (i.e. non-military) Court for 
any offence for which he would be triable if he 
were not subject to military law, and there a
certain offences, such as murder, for which he
must in general be tried by a civil tribunal. 
Thus, if a soldier murders a companion or robs 
traveler whilst quartered in England or in Vat
Diemen’s Land, his military character will not
save him from standing in the dock on thé
charge of murder or theft.”

151. Dicey dealt with the conflict of jurisdic 4
tion between the military and a civil Court in this
manner at page-302 : :

“In all conflicts of jurisdiction between a
military and a civil court the authority of the


            
            civil Courts prevails. Thus, if a soldier is acquit-
ted or convicted of an offence by a competent
civil court. he cannot be tried for the same
offence by a Court martial: but an acquittal or
conviction by a court martial say for man-
slaughter or robbery, is no plea to an indictment
for the same same offence at the Assizes.
When a soldier is put on trial on a charge of crime. obedience to superior orders is not of
itself a defence.
This is a matter which requires explana-
tion.

A soldier is bound to obey any lawful order
which he receives from his military superior.
but a soldier cannot any more than a civilian
avoid responsibility for breach of the law by
pleading that he broke the law in bona fide obe-
dience to the orders (say) of the commander-in-
chief. Hence the position of a soldier is in theo-
ry and may be in practice a difficult one. He
may, as it has been well said, be liable to be shot
by a court-martial if he disobeys an order, and
to be hanged by a judge and jury if he obeys it.
His situation and the line of his duty may be
seen by considering how soldiers ought to act in
the following cases.

During a riot an officer orders his soldiers
to fire upon rioters. The command to fire is jus-
tified by the fact that no less energetic course of
action would be sufficient to put down the dis-
turbance. The soldiers are, under these circum-
stances clearly bound from a legal, as well as
from a military, point of view to obey the com-
mand of their officer. It is a lawful order, and
the men who carry it out are performing their
duty both as soldiers and as citizen.

An Officer orders his soldiers in a time of
political excitement then and there to arrest and
shoot without trial a popular leader against
whom no crime has been proved, but who is
suspected of treasonable designs. In such a case
there is (it is conceived) no doubt that the sol-
diers who obey, no less than the officer who
gives the command, are guilty of murder and
liable to be hanged for it when convicted in due
course of law. In such an extreme instance as
this the duty of soldiers is, even at the risk of
disobeying their superior, to obey the law of the
land.

An officer orders his men to fire on a
crowd w thinks could not be dispersed
without the use of firearms, As a matter of fact
the amount of force which he wishes to employ
is excessive, and order could kept by the
mere threat that force would be used, The order,
therefore, to fire is not in itself a lawful order,
that is, the colonel, or other officer who gives it
is not legally justified in giving it, and will him-
self'be held criminally responsible for the death
of any person killed by the discharge of
firearms. What is from a legal point of view
the duty of the soldiers ? The matter is one
which has never been absolutely decided: the
following answer, given by Mr Justice Stephen,
is, it may fairly be assumed, as nearly correcta
reply as the state of the authorities makes it pos-
siblé to provide :

“I do not think, however, that the question
how far superior orders would justify soldiers
or sailors in making an attack upon civilians has
ever been brought before the courts of law in
such a manner as to be fully considered and
determined. Probably upon such an argument it
would be found that the order of a military
superior would justify his inferiors in executing
any orders for giving which they might fairly
suppose their superior officer to have good rea-
sons. Soldiers might reasonably think that their
officer had good grounds for ordering them to
fire into a disorderly crowd which to them
might not appear to be at that: moment engaged
in acts of dangerous violence, but soldiers could’
hardly suppose that their officer could have any
good grounds for ordering them to fire a volley
down a crowded street when no disturbance’ of
any kind was either in. progress or apprehended.
The doctrine that a soldier is bound under all
            
            circumstances whatever to obey his superior
officer_would be fatal_to military disicipline
itself for it would justify the private in shooting
the colonel by the orders of the captain, or in
deserting to the enemy on the field of battle on
the order of his immediate superior, I think it is
not less monstrous to suppose that superior
orders would justify a soldier in the massacre of
unoffending civilians in time of peace, or in the
exercise of inhuman cruelties, such as the
slaughter of women and children, during a
rebellion. The only line that presents itself to
my mind is that a soldier should be protected by
orders for which he might reasonably believe
his officer to have good grounds. The incon-
venience of being subject to two jurisdictions,
the sympathies of which are not unlikely to be
opposed to each others, is an inevitable conse-
quence of the double necessity of preserving on
the one hand the supremacy of the law, and on
the other the discipline of the army.”

(The underlinings are mine)

152. In the United Kingdom both the civil ser-
vants and the members of the armed forces hold
their office during the pleasure of the Crown,
although statutory protection of employment was
given to the civil servants but such protection are
not extended to the members of the armed forces,
they are regulated under the Royal Prerogative.

153. The Parliament, however, since 1955,
instead of passing annual Acts, gave the Army and
Air Force Acts, a maximum life of five years, sub-
ject to annual renewal by the Order in Council, But
such Orders in Council are required to be laid in
draft before the Parliament and are subject to an
affirmative resolution by each House.

154. The Navy, however, in the United King-
dom, has been free from constitutional problems.
The maintenance of Navy has always been within
the Royal Prerogative but its terms of enlistment and
discipline are regulated by the Acts of Parliament.

155. Let us now turn our eyes to the United
States of America. Following the continuous dis-
sentions and resentments of the of the inhabitants of the
colonies in the North American Continent because
of imposition of new taxes and stricter trade laws,
the Continental Congress appointed a Committee on
June 12, 1776, to prepare a draft for the declaration
of Independence. On July 4, 1776, the Declaration
of Independence was adopted ushering the birth of a
new nation. At that time George II] was the King og
England and Lord North was the Prime Minister.
The War of Independence continued for nearly six
years. Ultimately with the Surrender of Lord
Cornwallis on October 19, 1781, the war ended and
the Treaty acknowledging the independence and
sovereignty of the thirteen colonies was signed in
1783. In the meantime, the Articles of Confedera.
tion was ratified by all the States by March 1, 1781,
These constituted the Constitution of the United
States of America.

156. Article 1 describes the powers of the 
Congress of the United States. 

The relevant:-portion of Section 8 under Article
I reads :

"Section 8 ................

To declare War, grant letters of marque and
reprisal, and make rules concerning captures on
land and water;

To raise and support Armies, but no appro-
priation of money to that use shall be for |
longer term than two years;
To provide and maintain a Navy; _
To make rules for the government and reg-
ulation of the land and naval forces;
To provide for calling forth the vine
execute the laws of the union, suppress insur
rections and repel invasions;

To provide for organizing, arming and dis-
ciplining, the militia, and for governing such
part of them as may be employed in the Service
of the United States, reserving to the states
respectively, the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia accord-

            
            ing to the discipline prescribed by Congress...
..."
157. Again, the relevant portion of Section 2
under Article II reads:
“section 2. The President shall be com-
mander in chief of the Army and Navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several
states, When called into the actual service of the
United States; he may require the opinion, in
writing, of the principal officer in cach of the
executive departments, upon any subject relat-
ing to the duties of their respective officers and
he shall have power to grant reprieves and par-
dons for offences against the United States,
except in cases of impeachment.”

Similar is the position in most of the countries
with written Constitutions including Bangladesh.

158. The defence services of Bangladesh are
ogans of the Republic, an important one. Because,
itdefend the country and protect its frontiers. The
members of the forces are expected to be alert to
face any emergency. Of necessity, they must. main-
lin a very high degree of discipline so that they
remain always equipped and prepared to serve the
Cause of the country and its people.

159. But at the same time, it should be remem-
bered that they are not foreign legions, they are the
citizens of this country and are raised from amongst
the People of this country, They are sons of the soil.

160. besides, the defence services Owe its
existence to the Constitution and also owe its
absolute loyalty to the Constitution like any other
service of the Republic and bound to obey its edicts
to the letter. Article 62 of the Constitution provides
for raising and maintenance of defence services.
Article 62 as follows:

“62(1) Parliament shall by law provide for
regulating— 

(a)the raising and maintaining of the
defence services of Bangladesh and
Of their reserves; 

(b) the grant of commissions therein;
(c) the appointment of chiefs of staff of
the defence services, and their
salaries and allowances; and
(d)the discipline and other matters
relating to those services and
reserves,

(2) Until Parliament by law provides for the
matters specified in clause (1) the
President may, by order, provide for such
of them as are not already subject to exist-
ing law.” .


But the supreme command of the defence serv-
ices of Bangladesh is vested in the President. Article
61 reads as follows:

“The supreme command of the defence
services of Bangladesh shall vest: in the
President and the exercise thereof shall be reg-
ulated by law and such law shall, during the
period in which there is a Non-Party Care-taker
Government under article 58B, be administered
by the President.”

Besides, in case of grave emergency, threaten-
ing the security or economic life of Bangladesh, the
President, with the advice of the Prime Minister,
may even declare an emergency in the country under
Article 141A.

161. From the above it would appear that the
defence services are the creation of the Constitution
like other services. Each service has got its respec-
tive and specific duties, purposes and functions, The
one purpose is common. It is to serve the people.
That is the most fundamental and prime object of all
the services in Bangladesh. The defence services are
no exception. The Constitution created those servic-
es not for any other purpose but in order to serve the Nation and its people. In this connection it should be
engraved in our minds that the ‘people’ creates the
Nation, the people builds the Nation. It is the people
who makes supreme sacrifices for the creation of
their Nation, It is the people for which a Nation
exists. It is the people for which. all ‘services’ are

            
            required and are created by the Constitution. It is the
people for which all high functionaries of the
Republic do exist. Those high functionaries are cre-
ated not for staying in ivory towers, rather they are
created, so that they can serve the people better. The
people do not exist for them, rather, they including
the Judges exist for the people and only for the peo-
ple, however humble their station of life may be.
The greatness of the State-functionaries depends not
on their status or rank but how much and how far
they can serve their people.

162. This fundamental principle to serve the
people must be engraved in the minds of all
Functionaries and all persons in the service of the
Republic.

No wonder, one of the greatest President on
Earth, while dedicating a portion of the battle-
field at Gettysburg, for the fallen heroes, pro-
claimed ‘that government of the people, by the
people, for the people shall not perish from_the
earth’.
Part XIX

Martial Law Concept

163. Now let us consider the concept of
Martial Law. The learned Additional Attorney-
General and Mr Akhtar Imam called it Martial Law
Jurisprudence or Martial Law Culture in Bangla-
desh. Bangladesh is comparatively a new nation, so
also its armed forces. As such, we would hark back
to legal history predominantly of England. It
appears that during the reign of Mary in 1557, rebels
were executed according to martial law. In 1595,
during the reign of Elizabeth I, Sir Thomas Wyllford
was appointed provost-marshal and some riotous
Persons were executed as traitors by martial law, But
even in those days martial law was applied under the
civil authority of the Monarch.

164. In 1628, during the reign of Charles I,
The Petition of Right was enacted. This Act nearly
four hundred years ago, glorified the rights and lib-
erties of the subjects in the then En
VIII of the said Act forbidden trial of an subject by
Martial Law. The relevant Portion of Clause VII,
dealt with Martial Law, reads as follows: 

VIII ... and that no freeman in any such
manner as is before mentioned be imprisoned
or detained; and that your Majesty will be
pleased to remove the said soldiers and
mariners, and that your People may not be so
burdened in time to come; and that the foresaid
commissions, roceedin by martial law
may be revoked and annulled; and that hereafter 
no commissions of like nature may issue forth
to any person or persons’ whatsoever to be exe.
cuted as aforesaid, lest by colour of them any of 
your Majesty’s subjects be destroyed or put to 
death contrary to the laws and franchise of the
land.” (The underlinings are mine)

‘(Quoted from Thomas Pitt Taswell-
Langmead: English Constitutional History, |
Tenth Edition, 1946),

In support of the Bill, Seldon, Coke, Littleton,
Digges, Noy and other eminent lawyers of the day |
argued on the part of the Commons while the
Attorney-General Heath, Serjeant Ashley and others |
acted as counsel -for the Crown. Besides, Charles |
also consulted Chief Justices Hyde and Richardson. |
On 7th June, 1628, the King signified the royal |
assent—‘soit droit fait comme est desire.’

165. This Petition of Right was subsequently |
superseded by the Bill of Rights, 1689.

166. The subject of Martial Law has been
extensively dealt with by FKMA Munim, our late
Chief Justice, in his book titled ‘Legal Aspects of |
Martial Law (1989)’. The author quoted from me 
authorities on the subject. We also cited some of
those quotations from the said book as the oiriginal
books are not readily available. This we have done
in order to highlight the legal concept of Martial law
from by gone days.

167. Blackstone said with regard to Martial
Law in this manner :


            
            Martial Law is built on no settled princi-
ples but is entirely arbitrary in its decisions,
and is in truth no law, but something indulged
rather than allowed as law, a temporary exer-
scence bred out of the distemper of the State
and not any part of the permanent and perpetu-
al laws of the kingdom. The necessity of order
and discipline is the only thing which can give
it countenance and therefore it ought not to be
permitted in time of peace when the King’s
courts are open for all persons to receive justice
according to the law of the land.” (Quoted from
Legal Aspect of Martial Law Page-1).

168. We also quote the speech of the Duke of
Wellington from the aforesaid book at page — 3 :

“The Duke of Wellington’s Speech in the
House of Lords on April 1, 1851 quoted in
Clode’s Military Forces of The Crown,
Vol.II,502 — “As to the remark which had been
made about him, he would say word in expla-
nation. He contended that Martial Law was nei-
ther more nor less than the will of the General
who commands the army. In fact, Martial Law
meant no law at all....... an

169. Possibly the last time the Martial Law
was applied in England in 1780 when serious dis-
turbance and troubles broke out. Lord Chancellor
Thurloe sought justification in this way :

“In all cases of high treason, insurrection,
and rebellion within the Realm, it was the pecu-
liars office of the Crown to use the most effectu-
al means of resisting and quashing such insur-
rection and rebellion, and punishing the instru-
Ments of it. But the King, any more than the pri-
vate person, could not supersede the law, nor
any act contrary to it and therefore he was
bound to take care that the means he used for
putting an end to the Rebellion and Insurrection
were legal and constitutional and the Military
employed for that purpose were every one of
them amenable to the law, because no word of
command from their particular officer no direc
tion from the War Office or Order of Council
could warrant or sanction their action illegally.
(Quoted from Legal Aspect of Martial Law at
page-21). (The underlinings are mine)

170. It is apparent in all those cases that the
Martial Law was applied in a very restricted way on
due approval from Parliament and the civilian
authority.

171. The judicial view on Martial Law has
been aptly explained in the case of Tilonko vs
Attorney-General of Natal (1907) AC 93. Lord
Halsbury LC held at page-94:

“It is by this time a very familiar observa-
tion that which is called “martial law” is no law
at all. The notion that “martial law” exists by
reason of the proclamation- an expression
which the learned counsel has more than once
used-is an entire debusion. The right to admin-
ister force against force in actual war does not
depend upon the proclamation of Martial Law
at all. It -depends upon the question whether
there is war or not. If there is war, there is the
right to repel force by force,............ But to
attempt to make these proceedings of so-called
“courts martial,” administering summary jus-
tice under the supervision of a military com-.
mander, analogous to the regular proceedings of
Courts of Justice is quite illusory.

(The underlinings are mine)

172. AV Dicey in his celebrated treatise ‘An
Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution,. Tenth Edition-1959, dealt with the .
concept of Martial Law at page-287 in this manner :

“Martial law,” in the proper sense of that
term, in which it means the suspension of ordi-
nary law_and the temporary government of a
country or parts of it by military tribunals , is
unknown to the law of England

Martial-law is sometimes employed as a
name for the common law right of the Crown
and its servants to repel force by force in the
case of invasion, insurrection, riot, or generally
of any violent resistance.to the law. This right,

            
            or power, is essential. to the very existence of
orderly government, and is most assuredly rec-
ognized in the most ample manner by the law of |
England. It is a power which has in itself no
special connection with the existence of an
armed force.

It is also clear that a soldier has, as such, no
exemption from liability to the law for his con-
duct_in restoring order. Officers, magistrates,
soldiers, policemen, ordinary citizens, all occu-
py in the eye of the law the same position; ......
... .they_are, each and all of them, liable to be
called. to account before a jury for the use of
excessive, that is, of unnecessary force: .......
Nothing better illustrates the noble energy with
which judges have maintained the rule of regu-
lar law, even at periods of revolutionary vio-
lence, than Wolfe Tone’s Case. In 1798, Wolfe
Tone, an Irish rebel, took part in a French inva-
sion of Ireland: The man-of-war in which he
sailed was captured, and Wolfe Tone was
brought to trial before a court-martial in Dublin.
‘He was thereupon sentenced to be hanged. He
held, however, no commission as an English |
Officer, his only commission being one from the
French Republic. On the morning when his exe-
cution was about to take place application was
made to the Irish King’s Bench or a writ of
habeas corpus. The ground taken was that
Wolfe Tone, not being a military person, was
not subject to punishment by a court-martial, or,
in effect, that the officers who tried him were
attempting illegally to enforce martial law. The
Court of King’s Bench at once granted the writ,
When it is remembered that Wolfe Tone’s sub-
stantial guilt was admitted, that the court was
made up of judges who detested the rebels, and
that in 1798 Ireland was in the midst of a revo-
lutionary crisis, -it will be admitted that no more
splendid assertion of the supremacy of the law
can be found than the protection of Wolfe Tone
by the Irish Bench.” (The underlinings are mine)

173. The American experience and the legal
position of Martial Law has been dealt with by
Professor Westel Woodbury Willoughby in his cele
brated treatise .on the Constitutiong) Law of the
United States (Second Edition), In Vol. III at
page—1586, Martial Law has been dealt with in this
manner: 

“1041. Martial Law Defined.

In the most comprehensive Sense of the
term, Martial Law includes al] law that has ref
erence to, or is administered by, the military
forces of the State. Thus it includes (1) Military
Law Proper, that is, the body of dministrative
laws created by Congress for the government of
the army and navy as an organized force: (2) the
principles governing the conduct of military
forces in time of was and in the government of
occupied territory and 3 Martial Law in sensu
strictiore or that law which has application 
when the military arm does not supersede civil
authority but is called upn to aid it in the exe
cution of its civil function

1042. Martial Law, in Sensu Strictiore. is a
Form of the Police Power

As the Supreme Court in US vs Lee speaking through Justice Miller
declared:

No man in this country is so high that he
is above the law. No officer of the law may set
that law at defiance. with impunity. All the offi
cers of the Government from the highest to the
lowest are creatures of the law and are bound to
obey it. It is the only supreme power in our sys
tem of government and every man who by
accepting office participated in its functions is
only the more strongly bound to submit to the
supremace and to observe the liabilities which
it imposed upn the exercise of the authority
which it gives (106 US 196)

174. In delineating the role of an armed force
in aid of the civil authorities, the Court in Ela vs
Smith [5 Gray (Mass) 121], said,

While thus recognizing the authority of 
the civil officers to call out and use an armed

            
            force to aid suppressing a riot or tumult actu-
ally existing or preventing one which is threat-
ened it must be borne in mind that no power is
conferred on the troops when so assembled to 
act independently of the civil authority.. They
are to act as an armed police only subject to the
absolute and exclusive control and direction of
the magistrates and other civil officers desig
nated in the statue as to the specific duty or
service which they are to perform. Nor can the
magistrate delegate his authority to the military
force which he summons to his aid; or vest in
the military authorities an iscretion ower
to take any steps Or do any act to prevent or sup-
press a mob or riot. They must perform only
such service, and render such aid, as is required
by the civil officers....It does not follow from
this, however, that the military force is to be
taken wholly out of the control of the proper
officers. They are to direct its movements in the
execution of the orders given by the civil offi-
cers, and to manage the details in which a spe-
cific service or duty is to be performed. But the
service or duty must be first prescribed and des-
ignated by the civil authority.” (from
Willoughly-page 1591(foot note).

(The underlinings are mine)

175. The Legislature of Rhode Island placed
the State under Martial Law following Dorr’s
Rebilion Lurther was a Dorr supporter, he brought
an action against Borden for breaking and entering
his house. Borden's defence was that he being a
member of a militia acted under orders. In the case
of Luther vs Borden 7 How I (1849). Teney CJ of US
Supreme court gave his opinion :

"Unquestionably a military government
established as the permanent gevernmetn of the 
State would not be a republican government 
and it would be the duty of Congress to over
throw ir and unquestionably a State may
use its military power to putdown an armed
insurrection too strong to be controlled by the
civil authority No more force
however can be used that is necessary to
accomplish the object. And if the power is exer-
cised for the purposes of oppression, and any
injury wilfully done to person or property the
party by whom, or by whose order_it is com-
mitted, would undoubtedly be answerable.”
(The underlinings are mine)

(Quoted from: Willoughby Para-1048,
Page-1593-94).

176. In outlining the general principles gov-
erning the powers and authority of military officers,
Teney CJ held in Mitchell vs Harmony 13 How 115):

“There are,” he said, “occasions where pri-

vate property may lawfully be taken possession
_of or destroyed to prevent it from falling into
the hands of the public enemy, and also where a
military officer charged with a particular duty
may impress private property and take it for
public use............066 It is not enough to show
that he exercised an honest judgment, and took
the property to promote the public service, he
_ must also prove what the nature of the emer-
gency was, or what he had reasonable grounds
to believe it to be; and it will then be for the
Court and jury to say whether it was so pressing
as to justify an invasion of private right. Unless
this is established, the defense must fail because
it is very clear that the law will not permit pri-
vate property to be taken merely to insure the
success of an enterprise against a public enemy.
_.. It can never be maintained that a military
officer can justify himself for doing an unlaw-
ful act, by producing the order of his superior.
The order plliate but it cannot justify.”
. (The underlinings are mine)

(Quoted from Willoughby, Page-1597),

In the case of Raymond vs Thomas 9] US 712,
the attempt of a ‘military commander to annul a
decree of a Court was declared void.

177. Even immediately after the war is termi-
nated and the general legislative power is absent, the
US Supreme: Court held. in the case of Dooley vs
United States 182 US 222, that though prior to the

            
            treaty of peace, the military commander might, as a
belligerent right, levy customs duties on goods com-
ing into Porto Rico from the United States, after that
‘date he no longer had the authority, ( Quoted from
Willoughby at page-1583-84).

178. Although under the Constitution, it is for
the Congress to declare war but when a civil war is
in existent, it may be recognized as such by the
President of the United States, the Chief executive
of the country, even without a congressional decla-

ration, depending on the gravity and exigencies of
the situation. °

179. In the beginning of the civil war, Presi-
dent Lincoln without waiting for any congressional
recognition of the State of war, swiftly ordered
blocked of the seceding States on April 19, 1861.
The Congress, however, formally declared war to
exist on July 13 and validated retroactively the acts
of the President prior to that date.

180. The famous case of ex parte Milligan 71
US (4 Wall) 2, 18 L Ed. 281 (1866), glorified the
rights of people even during war,

181. Milligan, a civilian resident of Indiana,
was a Southern sympathizer, On an allegation of
treason against the Northern America he was arrest-
ed on October 5, 1864 and on the orders of General
Hovey, he was tried by a military commission and
sentenced to be hanged on May 19, 1865.

On a Writ of habeas corpus, the following
three questions were before the Supreme Court
of the United States :

(i) Whether the Court had jurisdiction in
view of legislation suspending the writ
of habeas corpus;

(ii) Whether the military had jurisdiction to
try him;

(iii) Whether Milligan should be dis-
charged.

This was a time when civil war was raging for
more than three years and the very existence and
foundation of the Republic was severly threatened
Even in that trying and precarious situation the
Hon’ ble Judges of the Supreme Court did not relent
from upholding the fundamental principles of the
Constitution in obedience to their oath and held that
Congress was without Constitutional authority to
suspend the privilege of habeas Corpus and to allow
exercise of Martial law in the State of Indiana where
there was no rebellion at the relevant time

182. Mr Justice Davis delivered the opinion
of the Supreme Court. We quote the relevant potion
of the opinion from sases and Martial on Cons
titutional Law (1952 Revision) :by Professor John P
Frank, at page-258 -265 :

No graver question 
was ever considered by this court nor one
which more nearly concerns the rights of the
whole people for it is the birth right of every 
American citizen, when charged with crime
be tried and punished according to law.....,,
the protection of the law human rights are
secured; withdraw that protection, and they are |
at the mercy of wicked rulers, or the clamor of
an_excited people. If there was law to justify,
this military trial, it is not our province to inter
fere; if there was not, it is our duty to declare
the nullity of the whole proceedings. The deci-
sion of this question does not depend on argu-
ment or judicial precedents, numerous and
highly illustrative as they are. These precedents.
inform us of the extent of the struggle to pre
serve liberty and to relieve those in civil life
from military trials. The founders of our gov
ernment were familiar with the history of that
struggle and secured in a written constitution
every right which the people had wrested from
power during a contest of ages By that
Constitution and the laws authorized by it this
question must be determined

Time has provern the discernment of our
ancestors; for even these provisions, expressed
in such plain English word, that if would seem
the ingenuity of man could not evade them are

            
            now after the lapse of more than seventy years,
sought to be avoided. Those great and good
men foresaw that troublous times would arise
when rulers and people would become restive
under restraint and seek by sharp and decisive
measure to accomplish ends deemed just and
proper and that the principles of constitutional
liberty would be in peril unless established by
irrepeable law. The history of the world had
taught them that what was done in the past
might be attempted in the future. The Constitutu-
ion of the US is a law for rulers and
people equally in was and in peace and covers
with the shield of its protection all classed of
men at all times and under all cicumstances.
No doctrine, involving more pernicious conse-
quences, was ever invented by the wit of man
than that any of its provisions can be suspended
during any of the great exigencies of govern-
ment. Such a doctrine leads directly to anarchy
or despotism, but the theory of necessity on
which it is based is false: for the government
within the Constitution, has _all the powers
granted to it, which are necessary to preserve its
existence; as has been happily proved by the
result of the great effort to throw off its just
authority......

It is claimed that martial law covers with
its broad mantle the proceedings of this military
commission. The proposition is this; that in a
time of war the commander of an armed force
(if in his opinion the exigencies of the country
demand it, and of which he is to judge), has the
Power within the lines of his military district, to
suspend all civil rights and their remedies, and
subject citizen as well as soldiers to the rule of
his will; and in the exercise of his lawful
authority cannot be restrained, except by his
superior officer or the President of the United
States.

The statement of this proposition shows its
importance; for if true republican government
is a failure and there is an end of liberty regu
lated by law. Martial Law, established on such a

basis destroys every guarantee of the
Constitution and effectually renders the mili
tary independent of and superior to the civil
power the attempt to do which by the King of
Great Britain was deemed by out fathers such
as offense. that they assigned it to the world as
one of the causes which impelled them to
declare their independence. Civil liberty and
this kind of martial law cannot endure together
the antagonism is irreconcilable and in the
conflict one or the other must perish
the illustrious men who framed
that instrument were guarding the foundations
of civil liberty against the abuses of unlimited
power: they were full of wisdom, and the les-
sons of history informed them that a trial by an
established Court, assisted by an impartial jury,
was the only sure way of protecting the citizen
against oppression and wrong. Knowing this,
they limited the suspension to one great right, ©
and left the rest to remain forever inviolable.
But, it is insisted that the safety of the country
in time of war demands that this broad claim for
martial law shall be sustained. If this were true
it could be well said that a coun reserved a
the sacrifice of all the cardinal principles of lib-
erty, is not worth the cost of preservation.
Happily, it is not so,
.As necessity creates the rule, so it
limits_its duration: for, if this government_is
continued after the courts are reinstated it is a
gross usurption of pwer. Martial rule can
never exist where the courts are open, and in the
proper and unobstructed exercise of their juris-
diction. It is also confined to the locality of
actual war, Because, during the late Rebellion it
could have been enforced in Virginia, where the
national authority was overturned and the
courts driven out, it does ‘not follow that it
should obtain in Indiana, where that authority
was never disputed, and justice was always
administered. And so in the case of a foreign
invasion, martial rule may become a necessity
in one state when in another it would be

            
            “mere lawless violence.”
(The underlinings are mine)

After this judgment, Milligan was released in
April, 1866.

In March, 1868, he successfully brought an
action for damages against General Hovey for
unlawful imprisonment.

183. The lofty ideals of liberty, dreamt of and
after a long and prolonged uncertain war of inde-
pendence, penned down in the Constitution by its
framers, was again rekindled in the forceful lan-
guage of Justice Davies in this case nearly ninety
years after the Declaration of Independence. The
civil war which was uncertain like any other war,
though threatened the very existence of the Republic
but that did not deter the Judges of the Supreme
Court of the United States to uphold the ideals of
liberty and democracy as enshrined in the Constitu-
tion even in the face of so very lucrative argument in
favour of Martial Law and the trial by the military
commission. The Supreme Court inspite of the rag-
ing civil war in and around Indiana refused to recog-
nise martial law in the said State since the normal
Courts were still functioning and an offender could
very well be brought before the Court there for trial
under the law. It is only when because of existence
of such a state of war that normal trial could not be
held as the Courts were already closed only then and
then only, martial rule could be exercised but for a
very limited period and that also as regulated by
Congress, the upholder of civil rule and authority,
This decision is a gift of the Supreme Court to
the people of the United States. This is a bulwark for
the protection of the liberties of its citizens.

Part XX
The Martial Law in Bangladesh

184. It may be reiterated here that this new
nation plunged into a disaster and a Constitutional
crisis when in'the early morning of August 15, 1975,
the President of Bangladesh with his family mem-
bers were brutally killed by a section of the army
officers and Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed in con-
spiracy with them seized the office of the President
of Bangladesh. Bangladesh was ruled by Martial
Law Proclamations for nearly the next 4(four) years.
The said whole period of Martial Law was sought to
be validated by insertion of Paragraphs 3A and 18 in
the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.

185. It appears that by the Proclamation Order
No. 1 of 1977, the English text of a new paragraph,
among others, paragraph 3A was inserted in the
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution. Its Bengali ver.
sion was inserted by the Second Proclamation Order
No. IV of 1978.

186. Besides, by section 2 of the Constitution
(Fifth Amendment) Act, 1979, paragraph 18 was
added to the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution.
This addition was done predominantly in order first-
ly, to validate all Proclamations, Martial Law
Regulations and Martial Law Orders and other laws
made during the period: between the August 15,
1975 and the April 09, 1979; secondly, to validate all
actions and proceedings taken in pursuance to those
laws during the said period, and thirdly, to protect
those actions and proceedings taken in pursuance to
the above Proclamations etc from being called in
question before any Court on any ground whatsoev
er.

187. Before considering the above mentioned 
paragraph 18 to the Fourth Schedule of the Constitu-
tion, we would familiarize ourselves as to some of 
the Proclamations and MLRs and MLOs which 
were sought to be ratified and validated by the sec
ond Parliament.

On our queries as to which Proclamations,
MLRs and MLOs and proceedings were ratified
by the Fifth Amendment, the learned Additional
General referred to the Proclamation dated
August 20, 1975, Proclamation dated Novem-
ber 8, 1975, Proclamation dated November 29,
1976. We were also informed on our queries -
that Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed became the
President of Bangladesh on and from the morn
ing of the 15th August, 1975. He nominated


            
            Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem, the then
Chief Justice of Bangladesh, as the President of
Bangladesh on November 06, 1975. By the
Proclamation dated November 8, 1975, Justice
sayem proclaimed himself as the cet Martial
Law Administrator and appointe the Deputy
chief Martial Law Administrators. From time
to time, 4 number of Proclamation Orders,
MLRs and MLOs were issued. By the Procla-
mation dated November 29, 1976, the office of
the Martial Law Administrator was handed over
to Major General Ziaur Rahman, BU, psc and
he became the Chief Martial Law Administra-
tor, In due course, Justice Sayem on April
21,1977, nominated Major General Ziaur Rah-
man, BU, to become the President of Bangla-
desh. On becoming the President of Bangla-
desh, Proclamation (Amendment) Order, 1977
(Proclamation Order No. 1 of 1977) was made
on April 23, 1977. We also found that the
Referendum Order, 1977 (Martial Law Order
No. 1 of 1977) was made on May 1, 1977, fol-
lowed by the Second Proclamation Order No.
IV of 1978 and many others. There were a num-
ber of Martial Law Regulations and Orders, the
details of which could not be furnished either
by the learned Additional Attorney-General or
by the learned Advocate for the petitioners.
However, from them we could gather that more
than two hundred and fifty MLRs and MLOs
Were made in pursuance to the above mentioned
Proclamations and that those above mentioned
Proclamations and all other MLRs and MLOs
and the proceedings and actions taken thereon
were sought to be ratified and validated by the
Fifth Amendment.

Part XX (A)
The Proclamation On August 20, 1975

Let us first consider the Proclamation
dates 20, 1975. It reads as follows :


“PROCLAMATION
The 20th August, 1975,

Whereas I, Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed,
with the help and-mercy of the Almighty Allah
and relying upon the blessings of the people,
have taken over all and full powers of the
Government of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh with effect from the morning of the
15th August, 1975...

And whereas, I placed, on the morning of
the 15th August, 1975, the whole of Bangladesh
under Martial Law by a declaration broadcast
from all stations of Radio Bangladesh;

And whereas, with effect from the morning
of the 15th August, 1975, Lhave suspended the
provisions of article 48, in so far as it relates of
election of the President'of Bangladesh, and
article 55 of the Constitution of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, and modified the pro-
visions of article 148 thereof and form I of the
Third Schedule thereto to the effect that the
oath of office: of the President of Bangladesh
shall be administered_by the Chief Justice of
Bangladesh and that the president may enter
upon office before he takes the oath;

Now, thereof, 1, Khandaker Moshtaque
Ahmed, in exercise of all powers enabling me
in this behalf, do hereby declare that—

(a) 1 have assumed and entered upon the
office of the President of Bangladesh
with effect from‘the: morning of the
15th August, 1975; 
(b) I may’ make, “from time to time,
Martial Law Regulations and Orders-
(i) providing for setting up Special
Courts or Tribunals for the trial
and punishment of any offence
under such Regulations or
Orders or for ‘contravention
thereof, and of offences under
any other law;

            
            (ii) prescribing penalties for
offences under such Regu-
lations or Orders or for contra-
vention thereof and special
penalties for offences under any
other law;

(iii) empowering any Court or
Tribunal to try and punish any
offence under such Regulation
or Order or the contravention
thereof;

(iv) barring the jurisdiction of any
Court or Tribunal from trying
any offence specified in such
Regulations or Orders;

(c)I may rescind the declaration of
Martial Law made on the morning of
the 15th August, 1975, at any time,
either in respect of the whole of
Bangladesh or any part thereof, and
may again place the whole of
Bangladesh or any part thereof under
Martial Law by a fresh declaration;

(d)this Proclamation and the Martial Law
Regulations and Orders made by me in’
pursuance thereof shall have effect
notwithstanding anything contained in
the Constitution of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh or in any law
for the time being in force;

(e)the Constitution of the_ People’s
Republic of Bangladesh shall, subject
to this Proclamation and the Martial
Law Regulations and Orders made by
me in pursuance thereof, continue to
remain in force;

f()all Acts, Ordinance, President’s Orders
and other Orders, Proclamations rules,
regulations, bye-laws, notifications and
other legal instruments in force on the
moming of the 15th August, 1975,
shall continue to remain in force until
repealed, revoked or amended ;

(g) no Court including the Supreme
Court or tribunal or authority shall
have any pwer to call in question in 
any manner whatsoever or declare ille
gal or void this Proclamation or any
Martial Law Regulation or Order made
by me in pursuance thereof, or any dec-
laration made by or under this
Proclamation, or mentioned in this
Proclamation to have been made or
anything done or any action taken by or
under this Procla-mation, or Mentioned
in this Procla-mation to have been
done or taken, or anything done or any
action taken by or under any Martial
Law Regulation or Order made by me
in pursuance of this Proclamation ;

(h) I may, by order notified in the official
Gazette, amend this Proclamation,

(The underlinings are mine)

It appears that on the 15th August, 1975.
Khandaker Moshtaque Ahmed, seized all and full
powers of the Government of Bangladesh and
assumed and entered upon the office of the President
of Bangladesh. We shall first consider the legal posi-
tion in this respect.

188. We specifically asked the learned
Additional Attorney-General that under what provi-
sion of the Constitution, Khondaker Mushtaque
Ahmed assumed: the office of the. President of
Bangladesh. The learned Additional Attorney-
General could not give any straight answer. He con-
tended firstly that Fourth Amendment of the
Constitution made such changes. necessary, besides.
he submitted, those actions, in any case, were rali-
fied by the Parliament by enacting the Filth
Amendment of the Constitution.

189. His first contention, namely, the Fourth
Amendment of the Constitution, is not the subject
matter of this Rule. Still, in order to consider and
appreciate the contention of the learned Additional
Attorney-General in this respect) we would refer to
it but briefly,



            
            190. The Constitution of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, came into operation on
December 16 1972. This Constitution provided for
a parliamentary form of Government. Under this
constitution the first general election of the country
was held in 1973 and one of the political parties
secured almost all the parliamentary seats in the
National Assembly out of the. total 300 seats.
Virtually it had already became a one party
Parliament without almost no opposition. After the
fourth Amendment all the existing political parties
joined the said National Party. We asked the learned
additional Attorney-General as to why the ruling
party inspite of its such majority became one of
many, but he could not explain. However, the Fourth
amendment was @ political decision and it ought to
have been faced politically. But this amendment was
opposed only by two or three members of the
Parliament as submitted by the learned Additional
Atormey-General ‘himself. Besides, this amendment
could have been challenged in Court, even that.was
not done. Assassination of the President or declara-
tion of Martial Law is not a very novel way to secure
repeal of such an amendment of the Constitution. It
might be a new innovation but it is neither demo-
cratic nor morally right or a legal way to change a
legally elected Government.

191. In the 17th century King Charles I was
beheaded at the instance of Lieutenant General
Oliver Cromwell but this could not be accepted by
the English people. Even after his death in 1658,
they punished him for his treasonous acts. After
restoration In 1660, the body of Oliver Cromwell
was exhumed and was subjected to the ritual of a
posthumas execution on January 30, 1661. Even if
we go further backwards in the history, the assassi-
nation of Julius Caesar in 44 B.C was never
approved even by the Romans and Marcus Junius
Brutus was charged with treason. He fled from
Rome and subsequently committed suicide,

192. Be that as it may, there may be divergent
of opinions in the national politics of a democratic
country. It is neither unnatural nor unheard of, But it
was an out and out political issue and ought to have
been settled either politically or legally. But Martial
Law was definitely not the answer as if Martial Law
is a multiparty democratic system. Rather, Khonda-
ker Mostaque Ahmed and his renegades captured
the State power for their own evil design and Fourth
Amendment was not shown as an excuse for Martial
Law, even by them.

193. Let us now consider the Proclamations
and some of the Martial Law Regulations and
Martial Law Orders, made thereunder, the copies of
which are made available to us.

194.  First, the Proclamation issued on August
20, 1975, narrated earlier. By this Proclamation,
Martial. Law was imposed in Bangladesh with effect
from August 15, 1975. Some of its salient features
are as follows:

(i) Certain provisions of. the Constitution
were suspended and modified,

(ii) The Proclamation, the Martial Law
Regulations and Orders became effective
in spite of the Constitution or other laws.

(iii) The Constitution remained in force but
subject to the Proclamation, the Martial
Law Regulations and Orders,

(iv) No Court including the Supreme Court
would have any power to call in question
the Proclamation, ~Martial . Law
Regulations or Orders.

In reply to our query as to who blessed
Khondaker Mushtaque Ahmed with the above noted
powers, the learned Additional Attorney-General
was without any reply save and except that the said
Proclamation was ratified and validated by the
Second Parliament.

195. On consideration of the above noted
Proclamation it appears that—. a
(i). Khondaker Moshtaque Ahmed had no
lawful authority to seize the office of
President of Bangladesh; as such, he was
anusurper,

            
            (ii) He had no authority to suspend any pro-
vision of the Constitution,

(iii) He had no authority to make any
Proclamation, Martial Law Regulation
or Order, beyond the ambit of the
Constitution.

(iv) He destroyed the supremacy of the
Constitution by making it subject to the
Proclamation, Martial Law Regulation
and Order.

(v) He ousted the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court, one of the three pillars of the
State.

(vi) The Proclamations etc. were made non
justiciable before the Court of law, as
such, the concept of the Rule of law was
destroyed.

Khondaker Moshtaque Ahmed and his collabo-
rators by these actions violated and disgraced the
Constitution and thereby committed the offence of
sedition against the Republic of Bangladesh:

Part XX (B)
The Proclamation On November 8, 1975

196. Next we shall consider the Proclamation
made on November 8, 1975.

The Proclamation reads as follows :
“ PROCLAMATION
The 8th November, 1975.

Whereas the whole of Bangladesh has been
under Martial Law since the 15th day of
August, 1975;

And whereas, Khandaker Moshtaque
Ahmed, who placed the country under Martial
Law, has made over the Office of President of
Bangladesh to me and I have entered upon that
Office on the 6th day of November, 1975:

And whereas, in. the interest of peace,
order, security, progress, prosperity and devel-
opment of the country, | deem it Necessary to
keep in force the Martial Law proclaimed on
the 15th August, 1975;

And whereas, for the effective enforcement,
of Martial Law it has become necessary for me
to_assume_the powers of Chief Martial Law:
Administrator_and_ to appoint_Deput Chief
Martial Law Administrators and to make some
modifications in the Proclamation of the 20th
August, 1975; 

Now, therefore, I, Mr Justice Abu Sadat
Mohammad Sayem, President of Bangladesh,
do hereby assume the powers of Chief Martial
Law Administrator and appoint the Chief of
Amny Staff, Major General Ziaur Rahman BU
psc; the Chief of Naval Staff, Commodore MH
Khan, PSN, BN, and the Chief of Air Staff, Air
Vice Marshal MG. Tawab, SJ SBt. PSA, BAF.,
as Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrator and
declare that—

(a) Martial Law Regulations and Orders
shall be made by the Chief Martial Law
Administrator;

(b) all Martial Law Regulations and Orders
in force immediately before this Procla-
mation shall be deemed to have been
made by the Chief Martial Law
Administrator and shall continue to
remain in force until amended or 
repealed by the Chief Martial Law —
Administrator;

(c) Parliament shall stand dissolved and be
deemed to be so dissolved with effect
from the 6th day of November, 1975,
and general elections of Members of 
Parliament shall‘be held before the end 
of February, 1977; 

(d) the persons holding office as Vice
President, Speaker, Deputy Speaker
Ministers, Ministers of State, Deput
Ministers. and_.Whips, _Immediately
before this Proclamation, shall_be


            
            deemed to have ceased to hold office
with effect from the 6th day of
November 1975

(e) an Ordinance promulgated by the
president shall not be subject to the lim-
itation as to its duration prescribed in the
Constitution of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh(hereinafter referred as the
Constitution)

(f)the provisions of Articls 48 of the
Constitution shall remain suspended
until further order

(g) Part VIA of the Constitution shall stand
omitted;

(h)the Chief Martial Law Administrator may
appoint Zonal or Sub-Martial Law
Administrators;

(i) I may, by order notified in the official
Gazette, amend this Proclamation;

(j) this Proclamation shall be a part of the
Proclamation of the 20th August, 1975,
and the Proclamation of the 20th August,
1975, shall have effect as modified by -
this Proclamation
 (the underlinings are mine)
Some of its salient features are as follows :

(i) Mr Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem
entered upon the Office of President of
Bangladesh on 6th November, 1975,

(ii) He assumed the office of the Chief
Martial Law Administrator (CMLA) and
appointed three Deputy Chief Martial
Law Administrators (DCMLA),

(iii) Parliament was dissolved with effect 
from 6th November 1975
(iv) part VIA of the Constitution was omitted,
(v) proclamation dated 8th November,
1975 motified the Proclamation dated
20th August, 1975 and became its part.

On consideration of. the above Proclamation, it
appears that :

(i) Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem,
the Chief Justice of Bangladesh, had no
lawful authority to enter into the office
of President of Bangladesh and to
assume the powers of CMLA, which
was: beyond the ambit of the
Constitution..

(ii) He had no lawful authority to dissolve the
Parliament,

(iii) Bangladesh was ruled for the next three
and half years without any Parliament,
by the dictators, as such, lost its
Republican character for the said period,

(iv) He had. no lawful authority to suspend
any provision or omit any part of the
Constitution,

(v) He had no lawful authority to make any
Proclamation, Martial Law Regulation
or Order.

(vi) Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem
violated the Constitution of Bangladesh.

(vii) He acted as a usurper in entering the
Office of the President and in assuming
the powers of CMLA.

Part XX (C)
Second Proclamation
(Third Amendment) Order, 1975

By clause gb, added by the Second
Proclamation, (Third Amendment) Order, 1975
(Second Proclamation Order No. III of 1975) dated
December 31, 1975, to the Proclamation dated -
November 8, 1975, the Bangladesh Collaborators
(Special Tribunals) Order, 1972 (PO No. 8 of 1972),
was omitted from the First Schedule to the
Constitution.


            
            Part XX (D)
Second Proclamation
(Sixth Amendment) Order, 1976

198. By clause (eb), inserted by the Second
Proclamation (Sixth Amendment) Order, 1976
(Second Proclamation Order No. III of 1976) dated
May 14, 1976, to the Proclamation dated November
8, 1975, the proviso to Article 38 of the Constitution
was omitted.

Part XX (E)
Second Proclamation
. (Seventh Amendment) Order, 1976

199. By the Second Proclamation (Seventh
Amendment) Order, 1976 (Second proclamation
Order No. IV of 1976), predominantly, the separate
Supreme Court and High Court were set up instead
of the earlier two Divisions of the Supreme Court,
along with other incidental changes. It came into
effect on and from August 13, 1976.

Part XX (F)
The Political Parties Regulation, 1976

200. The political Parties Regulation, 1976,
was made on 28th July, 1976 by the MLR No. XXII
of 1976, This was published in the Bangladesh
Gazette, Extra Ordinary. This Regulation repealed
the political parties Act, 1962 (III of 1962 ) and the

Political Parties (Prohibition ) Ordinance, 1975
(XLVI of 1975 ), Ad

‘Part XX (G)
_ The Third Proclamation

201. Next we shall consider the Proclamation
dated November 29, 1976. The said Proclamation
reads as follows :-

No. 1184-Pub—The following proclama-
tion made by. the President of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh, on the 29th Novem-
ber, 1976, is hereby published for general infor-
mation:


THIRD PROCLAMATION
The 29th November, 1976

Whereas I, Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem
President of Bangladesh and Chief Martial Law
Administrator, assumed, by the Proclamation of
the 8th November, 1975, the Powers of the
Chief Martial Law Administrator and appointed
the Chiefs of Staff of the Army, Navy and air
Force as Deputy Chief: Martial law
Administrators;

And whereas, I, do now feel that it is in the
national interest that the powers of the Chiet
Martial Law Administrator should be exercised
by Major General Ziaur Rahman B.U., psc., the
Chief of Army Staff; .

Now, therefore, in exercise of all powers
enabling me in this be and in modification of
the provisions of the Proclamations of the 20th
August, 1975, and 8th November, 1975, 1, Abu
sadat_ Mohammad = Sayem, - resident of
Bangladesh, do hereby hand over the Office of
Martial Law

Administrator to’ Major General Ziaur
Rahman BU, psc, who: shall hereafter exercise
all the powers of ‘Chief’ Martial Law
Administrator including the powers—

(a) to. appoint new: Deputy Chief Martial
Law Administrators, Zonal Martial Law
Administrators, and Sub-Zonal Martial
Law Administrators,

(b) to amend the Proclamations of the 20th
August, 1975, 8th November, 1975 and
This Proclamation,

(c)to make Martial. Law Regulations and
Orders, and
(d) to do any other act or thing or to take any
other action as he deems necessary in the
national interest or for the enforcement
of Martial. Law.
On consideration of the above noted
Proclamation it appears that :


            
            (I)Justice Abu Sadat Mohammed Sayem, the
President of Bangladesh handed over the
office of Martial Law Administrator to
Major General Ziaur Rahman BU, psc.

(II) Major General Ziaur Rahman BU, psc
would exercise all the powers of the
Chief Martial Law Administrator, with
powers amongst others, to amend the
Proclamations of the August 20, 1975,
November 8, 1975 and the Proclamation
dated November 29, 1976.

Part XX (H)
The Court’s Jurisdiction
(Restriction) Regulation, 1977

202. The Courts’ Jurisdiction (Restriction)
Regulation, 1977 was ‘passed by the MLR No.
XXXIV of 1977. The preamble of the said MLR
reads as follows :

[Published in the Bangladesh Gazette
Extraordinary, dated the 9th March, 1977]

THE COURTS’ JURISDICTION (RESTRIC-
TION)
REGULATION, 1977.
Martial Law Regulation No. XXXIV of 1977

WHEREAS it is expedient to make a Martial
Law Regulation for the purposes here in after
appearing;)

Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Third
Proclamation of the 29th November, 1976, read
with the Proclamations of the 20th August
1975 and 8th November, 1975, and in exercise
of all powers enabling him in that behalf the
Chief Martial Law Administrator is pleased to
make the following Martial Law
Regulations -
It also put restriction on the power of High
Court to make interim Orders, It also put restriction
on the power of other courts to pass temporary or
interim Injunction

Part XX (I)
Nomination of Major General
Ziaur Rahman as President

203. Thereafter, by an Order dated 21st April,
1977, Justice Sayem, nominated Major General
Ziaur Rahman, BU, psc to be the President of
Bangladesh. The said Order was published in
Bangladesh Gazette Extraordinary on April 21,
1977. The said Order reads as follows :

The Bangladesh Gazette
Extraordinary ..
_ Published by Authority
THURSDAY, APRIL 21, 1977

GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC
OF BANGLADESH ~

CABINET SECRETARIAT
Cabinet Division
ORDER
Dacca, the 21st April, 1977.

No. 1/1/77-CD(CS)-1.—Wuereas I, Abu
Sadat Mohammad Sayem, Assumed office of
. President of Bangladesh on being :nominated
under clause (aa) of the ‘Proclamation of the
20th August, 1975; 

AND Whereas I, because of my failing
health, am unable further to discharge the func-
tions of the office of President;

NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the
said Proclamation and in exercise of all powers
enabling, me in that behalf, 1 do hereby nomi-
nate Major General Ziaur Rahman, BU, to be
President of Bangladesh and hand over the
office of President to him who shall enter upon
that -office -after making the oath. before the
Chief Justice of Bangladesh or, any other Judge
of. the Supreme Court designated by him. .

_ ABU SADAT MOHAMMAD SAYEM
President.

            
            From the above Order it appears as follows :

(I) Mr Justice Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem
assumed the office of the President of
Bangladesh on nomination.

(II) He nominated Major General Ziaur
Rahman, BU, as the. President of
Bangladesh. .

Part XX (J)
The Proclamations.
(Amendment) Order, 1977

204. On 23rd April, 1977, the President and
the CMLA made the Proclamations (Amendment)
Order 1977 (Proclamation Order No.1 of 1977).
This was published in the Bangladesh Gazette
Extraordinary. The said Proclamation reads as fol-
lows :

[Published in the Bangladesh Gazette
Extraordinary, dated the 23rd April, 1977]

THE PROCLAMATIONS (AMENDMENT)
ORDER, 1977.
Proclamations Order No. 1 of 1977

WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend
the Proclamation of the 8th of November 1975,
and to amend the Third Proclamation of the
29th November 1976, for the purposes here-
inafter appearing |

Now, therefore, in pursuance of the Third
Proclamation of the 29th November, 1976, read
with the Proclamations of the 20th August |
975, and 8th November, 1975, and in éxercise
of all powers enabling him in that behalf, the
President and the Chief Martial Law Adminis-
trator is pleased to make the following order:—

1. Short title and commencement,— (1)
This Order may be called the Proclamations
(Amendment) Order, 1977.


(2) It shall come into force at once except
paragraph 2(6)(1) which shall come into force
on the revocation of the Proclamations of the
20th August, 1975, and 8h November, 1975
and the Third Proclamation of the 29th
November 1976, and the withdrawal of Martial
Law.

2. Amendment of — the Second
Proclamation. In the Proclamation of the the 8th
November, 1975,

(1) (for clause (ea) the following shall be
substituted, namely:— :

“(ea) for article 6 of the Constitution, the ,
following shall be substituted, namely:

“6. Citizenship.—(1) The citizenship of
Bangladesh shall be determined and regulated 
by law.

(2) The citizens of Bangladesh shall be
known as Bangladeshis.”;

(2) in' clause (f), the words and figures “of :
Article 48” shall be omitted;

(3):clause (fb) shall: be omitted;

(4) in clause (gc), after the word
“Schedule” at the end, the words “to this
Proclamation” shall be added:

(5) in clause (i), for the words “I. may” the
words “the Chief Martial Law Administrator
may” shall be substituted ; 

(6) in the schedule 

(a) entries 1,2,3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, and 10
shall be renumbered respectively as
entries 8, 10,11, 14, 15, 19, 20,21
and 22;

(b) before entry 8 as so renumbered, the
following new entries shall be inserted
namely:— .

“I. In the beginning of the Constitution
above the Preamble, the following shall be
inserted, namely:—


            
