

383. Referring to the case of Bamaswami vs
sate of Tamil Nadu reported in AIR 1976 SC 2027,
further observed—

<br>
“Thus we find that some of the confessing
accused did not participate in the forcible taking
away of the six victims but they played their
part truly by remaining on guard so as to over-
come any outside interference with the attain-
ment of their object. All the essential conditions
so far the presence of a common intention were
clearly proved in this case. There cannot be a
clearer case of applicability of section 34 of the
Penal Code than this.”

384. While commenting on section 34 of the
Penal Code the Supreme Court of India in the case
of Suresh vs State of UP reported in AJR 2001 SC
1344 at page 1348 para 21 observed as under:

“Even the concept of presence of the co-
accused at the scene is not a necessary require-
ment to attract section 34 i.e. the co-accused
can remain a little away and supply weapons to
the participating accused either by throwing or
by catapulting them so that the participating
accused can inflict injuries on the targeted per-
son. Another illustration, with advancement of
electronic equipment can be etched like this;
One of such persons in furtherance of the com-
mon intention, overseeing the actions from a
distance through binoculars can give instruc-
tions to the other accused through mobile
Phones as to how effectively the common inten-
tion can be implemented. We do not find any
teason why section 34 cannot apply in the case

Of those two persons indicated in the illustra-
tion.” ,

of eat The Supreme Court of India in the case
5 yea Pande vs State of UP reported in AIR
Teg C 331 at page 332 para 2 has observed in
Pect of common intention in the following terms:


It is now well settled that the common
intention referred to in section 34 presuppose a

Or concern, a pre-arranged plan i.e, a prior

meeting of minds. This does not mean that there
must be a long interval of time between the for-
mation of common intention and the doing of
the act. It is not necessary to adduce a direct
evidence of the common intention. Indeed, in
many cases it may be impossible to do so. The
common intention may be inferred from the
surrounding circumstances and the conduct of

the parties”

386. In the circumstances, it is well estab-
lished that for section 34 of the Penal Code to apply,
while the presence of accused is essential, but it
need not necessarily be the physical presence in all
cases. For the purpose of section 34 of the Penal
Code, “presence” of a person depends on the indi-
vidual facts and circumstances of a case. An
accused’s presence could be established if he has
joined in the actual doing of the act/offence by being
present or making him available for the purpose of
ensuring that the criminal act in furtherance of their
common intention is committed. The accused's
presence for the purpose for facilitating a criminal
act tantamounts to actual participation in the crimi-
nal act. All the accuseds including the principal
accused in furtherance of their common intention
participated in the offence with the knowledge that
there is some kind of help/assistance waiting nearby,
who are rendering such services/assistance to
achieve their common intention or object, and such
role of a participant, who is working along the same
line as the principal accused, can be heid to have
joined in commission of the offence under section
34 since he acted in furtherance of a common inten-
tion of all. The “presence” of an accused under sec-
tion 34 implies some kind of proximity with the
place of occurrence. This “proximity” is a relative
term which differs from facts to facts of cases or
which depends on the facts and circumstances of the
case. The presence or proximity of an accused for
the sake of section 34 does not necessarily require
the person to be physically present at the doorstep of
the place of occurrence in an extraordinary or
exceptional case. | am of the view that in special
extraordinary or exceptional circumstances, an
accused's presence can be proven under section 34
even if he is located at some distance from the place
of occurrence provided his position/location can be
shown to be in participation in the act for ensuring


            
success in furtherance of the common intention of
all. These extraordinary and exceptional circum-
stances would depend on the facts and circum-
stances of cases.

387. Both the learned Attorney-General and
Mr Anisul Huq having referred to the evidence of
PW 1, PW 4, PW 11, PW 12, PW 14, PW 37, PW
42, PW 48, PW 50, PW 20, PW 45, PW 47, PW 48
and PW 49 submitted that all the accused-appellants
with their common intention and common design
did their respective assigned tasks at designated
places and thereby participated in the commission of
offence causing the killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman and other victims on 15th August,
1975. In the reply, they have submitted that the prin-
ciple of section 34 of the Penal Code is very much
applicable in the case of all accused-appellants,
including the accused appellants, Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) and
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan,
who had not gone to the House No.677 of the then
President at Road No.32, Dhanmondi.

388. In extraordinary and exceptional circum-
stances of the instant case, I am of the opinion that
physical presence at the place of occurrence at
House No.677, Road No.32 is not necessary, where
all the accused-appellants in furtherance of their
common intention performed their respective crimi-
nal acts at designated places which were assigned to
them by the other accused persons as evident from
the evidence of prosecution witnesses. The require-
ment of physical presence in a given case depends
on its facts and circumstances. Fact of the instant
case is that the victims of murder includes
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the Father
of the Nation, who was also the President of the
Republic with members of his family and others at
the relevant time. I agree with the submissions of Mr
Tawfiq Nawaz, learned Senior Advocate and State
Counsel in the instant appeals, that constitutional
and legal personality, status, functions, privilege and
immunities as enjoyed by the President of the
Republic under the Constitution of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh should be borne in mind in
treating the instant case as an extraordinary or
exceptional case. Any harm done to the President of
the Republic amounts to an offence and violation of

the Constitution and resulting in irreparable damage
to the democratic institutions of the country. The
facts of the instant appeals involve an exceptional
circumstance, inasmuch as it relates to the 
unsavoury acts of the accused-appellants killing the
Father of the Nation and President of the Republic,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, with members
of his family and relations. In view of the constitutional privileges, special security measures and safeguards rendered to the President, the ambit of the net of conspiracy pre-plan and illegal Support
required for the heinous killing of the President cap.
not be equated with that of an ordinary citizen resid.
ing in a dwelling hut or any other place. To materi.
alise the common objective of the killing of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman with the
members of his family the accused appellants par.
ticipated in their respective assignment covering a
greater range of area starting from Cantonment,
Parade Ground of Balurghat, New Airport,
Mohakhali, area of Manik Mia Avenue, Mirpur
Road, Ministers’ Residence, Shahbagh Radio
Station, corner of Race Course, Lake Side at
Kalabagan, Dhanmondi and finally to House
No.677, Road No.32, Dhanmondi, and that provi-
sions of section 34 of Penal Code contains rule of
evidence which does not create a substantive
offence and, as such, the said participations of the
accused-appellants were made in furtherance of
their common intention to do the illegal act of the
killing of the then President with members of his
family and relations comes within the purview of
section 34. In accordance with the pre-plan pr
design and in order to materialise the same, the
accused appellants were deployed for committing
the illegal act of killing the then President with
members of his family and relations and according”
ly I am of the view that the convictions 4 coe
accused-appellants under sections 302, 34 and 120B
of the Penal Code do not suffer from any illegality
and, as such, the same do not call for any interfer
ence by this Apex Court. Since the trial Court in
the High Court Division made concurrent in
as to the commission of the offence, there is no
scope at this stage to interfere with the cone
findings of facts as to the involvement of the
accused-appellants in the commission of off
and, as such, all the appeals are liable to be dismissed

            
and the Death Reference is liable to be
affirmed.

389. Now it has to be analysed evidentially
whether the accused appellants have committed
offence under section 302 read with section 34 of
the Penal Code, From the evidence of Prosecution
witnesses namely, PW 44, PW 43, PW 11, PW 12,
pw 13 and PW 14, it appears that the accused
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman was in
charge of the operation and he was mobilising his
force according to his plans for Killing the then
president Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
and members of his family at House No, 677, Road
No.32, Dhanmondi. From the evidence of PW 20,
PW 23, PW 24, PW 25, PW 35, PW 39, PW 40, PW
44, PW 1, PW 4, PW 15, PW 16, PW 42, PW 44,
PW 45 and PW 46 it is manifested that the presence
of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman in the
residence of the then President at 32, Dhanmondi,
Radio Station and Balur Ghat in briefing the troops
and also mobilised them are all connected and the
same were done in furtherance of his common inten-
tion to materialise the ultimate goal of killing
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. PW 43 stat-
ed in his deposition about the conspiracy in the
house of Khondker Moshtaq Ahmed with Major
Khondker Abdur Rashid, Lieutenant Colonel
Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar
Rashid and some other army officers in July, 1975
after the meeting in a Madrassa at Daudkandi and
also at BARD, Comilla in 1975. PW 14 stated about
the presence of the appellant on the night following
on 14th August, 1975, After the night parade, he saw
in the parade ground Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Farugue Rahman, Major Mohiuddin (Lancer),
Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain, Lieutenant Kismat
éshem, Nazmul Hossain Ansar and some other
Petsons in civil dress. Accused Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman introduced Major Dalim and
‘eutenant Colonel Shahriar in civil dress. Accused
‘eutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman directed them
to obey their order. In the radio station, he saw
“leutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid coming from
‘he radio station after 5-30 AM in the morning. PW
14 proved the presence of the accused Lieutenant
Colonel Shahriar Rashid in the parade ground in the
‘Cantonment near Balurghat at 2-30 AM in the morning and at about 5-30 AM in the Radio Station, PW 24 also in his deposition stated that Major Khondker Abdur Rashid went to the parade ground at about 3-00/3-15 AM on the night following on 14th August,
1975 where Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman briefed them in presence of their Com:
manding Officer (“CO”), Major Khondker Abdur
Rashid and other officers. Major Khondker Abdur
Rashid and Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque intro-
duced them with the dismissed officers, namely,
Major Dalim, Major Rashid Chowdhury, Lieutenant
Colonel Shahriar and Captain Majed. Then
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman. and
Major Khondker Abdur Rashid ordered them to take
ammunition from the unit. When they started from
the Lancer unit and stopped on a road, PW 24 also
saw Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar, Captain Majed
and Captain Mostafa. He also saw Major Dalim,
Major Nur, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar, Major
Khondker Abdur Rashid, Major Rashed Chow-
dhury, Captain Majed, Captain Mostafa and other
officers going inside the Radio Station. PW 37 saw
Khondker Moshtaque, Taheruddin Thakur, Major
Dalim and Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar inside the
radio station. PW 38 left the Radio Station at 10 AM
in the morning of 15th August, 1975 with permision
of Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar, PW 42 also
saw Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) and others inside
the Radio Station. In Banga Bhaban he also saw
Major Shafiullah, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman and Major Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) in
the afternoon of 15th August, 1975.

390. PW 48 saw Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan in the Radio Station as well
as in the Banga Bhaban on 15th August, 1975. PW
15, PW 20, PW 46 and PW 47 also proved the pres-
ence of the accused Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan in the Banga Bhaban.

391. PW 60, Director General, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh pro-
duced a file on absorption issued by the Army
Headquarters in respect of the services of the Army
Officers including the accused Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan, who was placed on a
secondment in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan

            
was given employment in their Ministry and various
Missions abroad which is evident from the deposition of PW 57 and PW 60.

392, PW 17 saw Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) in the night parade on the
night following on 14th August, 1975 and afternoon
in the Regiment Parade Ground and in the evening
at Balurghat. From the evidence of PW 17, it transpires that Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) with Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid and others and thereafter on the order
of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), six guns were mobilised and deployed by the
side of the lake of Kalabagan and four rounds of
cannon shells were fired from the Kalabagan lake
side. The cannons were also returned to the barrack
on his order. PW 18 also stated the involvement of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery).
According to PW 18 by order of Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) they collected arms
and ammunitions and under his order they went
towards the north of Ganabhaban at about 7-00/7-30
AM in the morning. They went around the city
before returning to their unit. PW 18 stated that
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
along with Lieutenant Colonel Khandker Abdur
Rashid (Artillery) in presence of Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) gave necessary
instructions for mobilisation of the Artillery troops
and cannons with live shells.

393. PW 21 stated that on 15th August, 1975
they had the night parade on 14th August, 1975 at 9-
00 in the evening. At 2-00 PM their CO Major
Khondker Abdur Rashid, Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), Captain Bazlul Huda
and other officers came over at the parade ground.
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid ordered
them to take arms and ammunition for a special
emergency duty. This witness also identified
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery).
He saw Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) at 2-00 PM at the parade ground. He also
saw Major Bazlul Huda and other officers when
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
ordered them to take arms and ammunitions, PW 22
also stated that they had night parade on 14th

August, 1975 at New Airport and confirmed the
presence of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) on the parade ground, He stated that or
the order of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery), they reached at about 9-00 PM on 14uh,
August, 1975 and they continued the night Parade
till 12-00 midnight. At about 2-30 AM on 15th
August, 1975 Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur
Rashid along with Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddiy,
Ahmed (Artillery) and Major Bazlul Huda met with
some other unknown officers and Major Rashid told
them that they would have to go for a special duty
with necessary ammunition. He was also dropped },
the side of a small canal on Road No.32, Dhanmondi along with PW 21. This witness proved the
presence of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) at 2-30 AM in the early morning of |
August, 1975 when Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery) was briefing the troops. PW 27
stated that his Battle Commander was Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) and that PW
27 was with him. Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery) told them that at Balurghat there
were 130/150 soldiers from Lancer and 60/ 70 from
Artillery. PW 27 proceeded from the Green Road
through Mirpur Road to Kalabagan. PW 27 and 2/3
others were dropped in Kalabagan where they were
ordered by Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) not to allow any vehicle to pass through
the said road. PW 27 proved the presence of the
appellant Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) at New Airport at about 3-00/3-30 AM in
early morning at Kalabagan and at the Ganabhaban.
PW 34 also proved the presence of Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) in the night
parade of 14th August, 1975. He also saw that six
guns were taken to New Airport. PW 34 saw
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
by the side of gun and he asked the troops not to
allow anyone to pass through the road. PW 34 heard!
sounds of light arms from the north western comer
and then shells were fired from the gun by the side
of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery).

394. PW 35 also stated in his deposition that
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
was commander of 2nd Field Artillery Regiment. He


            
 heard from PW 18 that Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) took most of his troops to Dhanmondi. From the aforesaid evidence it appears that the PWs corroborated each other in proving the guilt of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed(Artillery).

395. In order to prove the charge against the
appellant, Major Bazlul Huda, the prosecution
examined a number of witnesses, namely, PW 1,
PW4, PW 5, PW 6, PW 7, PW 8, PW 9, PW 11, PW
12, PW 15, PW 21, PW 22, PW 46, PW 47 and PW
60 in support of their case.

396. PW 11 stated that at the time of night
parade the army officers went to the office of Major
AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) which was locat-
ed opposite to the quarters of PW 11 where he saw
some unknown army officers in civil dress, and at
about 12-00 midnight, he saw Major AKM Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Lancer) calling one person in civil
dress as “Huda come here”. Then Huda asked an-
other one “Dalim wait”. Thereafter PW 11 as SDM
asked him to go’ the “Kote” (i.e. light armoury)
straightaway for arms. Accordingly, he went to the
“Kote” at about 3-30 AM and took one G-3 rifle
with 18 cartridges and a magazine. The troops were
divided into several groups. Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer) briefed his group and asked them
to board the vehicle, PW 11 saw the said two per-
sons were previously in civil dress but thereafter in
amy uniform, one of them was a Major and the
other one was a Captain. He came to know from
Resalder Sarwar that they were Lieutenant Colonel
SHMB Nur Chowdhury and Major Bazlul Huda.
PW 1] with the vehicle came at about 4-30 AM near
the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
Which was about 80 feet away from the house. He
heard reports of fierce gun shots from the side of the
house of the then President and immediately there-
after he heard the words ‘hands up’, ‘hands up’. He
also heard the sound of 3/4 artillery gun shots. PW
1] was posted outside the gate of the house of
Bangabandhu with orders not to allow any entry or
exit into/from the house and where he saw that
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer),
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury and
Major Bazlul Huda were entering into the house of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at Road
No.32, Dhanmondi.

397. PW 12 in his deposition stated that there
was night parade on the night following 14th August
which was attended by them till 3-30 AM. He saw
three unknown officers in uniform who were intro-
duced by Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
(Lancer) as Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Hug Dalim
and Major Bazlul Huda. Licutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman briefed them that they should not
support monarchy but Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was
going to declare monarchy next day and as such
troops must obey his orders as well as the orders of
his officers and further directed them to take ammu-
nition from the “Kote” for the action. PW 1 AFM
Mohitul Islam, the informant of the case, was the
Personal Assistant of the then President of
Bangladesh, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
and was on duty in his residence at House No.677,
Road No.32, Dhanmondi from 8-00 PM on 14th
August, 1975. He spent his night there. At about 4-
30 -5-00 AM on 15th August, 1975, the President
told him to get in touch with the Police Control
Room (PCR). As he could not get in touch with PCR
properly, the President came down to PW1’s Room.
Suddenly a barrage of gun shots was fired on their
windows. When the firing stopped, the President on
his own valiantly enquired about the firing from the
army and police sentries present nearby.
Immediately thereafter, Sheikh Kamal came down.
At that time 3/4 Khaki and Black-dressed army per-
sonnel entered into the house and Major Bazlul
Huda fired a bullet at Sheikh Kamal and he fell
down in the room. The bullets also wounded the
informant PW 1 and PW 50 (DSA) who was in
charge of Police House Guard. They could not
escape as they were caught hold by Major Bazlul
Huda who put them in line in front of the main gate
of the house. The Special Branch Officer, standing
on the line, was shot down. Thereafter some of the
accused went upstairs shooting through the way.
The informant and PW.50 heard intermittent gun-
shot sounds and the cries of the women from
upstairs. Sheikh Naser, brother of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, was brought down from
upstairs, and was shot in the bathroom attached to
their office. Sheikh Russell, the youngest son of the
President and domestic servant Rama alias Abdur
Rahman were also brought down. When Sheikh


            
 Russell wanted to meet with his mother, the accused
persons snatched him away from the informant on
the pretext of taking him to his mother on the first
floor and thereafter the PW I again heard sound of
gunshot. At that time Major Bazlul Huda, who was.
at the gate told Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman (Lancer) that “all are finished”, Then PW 1
realised that the President of Bangladesh, Banga-
bandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, along with the
members of his family and other inmates of the
house were all brutally killed. At that time tanks
were moving on the road in front of the house of the
then President at Road No.32, Dhanmondi.
Lieutenant Colonel Jamil’s dead body was brought
in the house at about 8-00 AM. According to the evi-
dence of witnesses it appears that in the early morn-
ing of 15th August, 1975, the Father of the Nation,
President Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman,
Begum Mujib, Sheikh Kamal, Sheikh Naser and one
Police Officer of the Special Branch and others were
all brutally killed. PW 1 saw the presence of Lieu-
tenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman (Lancer),
Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Hug Dalim, Lieutenant
Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury and Major Bazlul
Huda in the house of the then President at the time
of occurrence and also after the occurrence. It tran-
spires from PW 1’s evidence that he made his
acquaintance of Major Bazlul Huda in 1973 in the
ferry ghat at Aricha Ghat.

398. PW 4 in examination-in-chief stated that
he along with 8 soldiers went to the residence of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at House
No. 677, Road No.32, Dhanmondi and while they
were hoisting the National Flag in the early mom-
ing, a barrage of fire was coming from the lake side.
PW 4 saw Major Bazlul Huda, Lieutenant Colonel
SHMB Nur Chowdhury and Major AKM Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Lancer) at the gate of the residence of
the President. Major Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant
Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury came up to the
verandah and, seeing Sheikh Kamal there, the
accused Major Bazlul Huda shot him by his sten gun
at the verandah and then again went to the reception
room. Major Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant Colonel
SHMB Nur Chowdhury lined up the police personnel and others. Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer) accompanied by Major Bazlul Huda and
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury having
started gun shot went to the upstairs of the house of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Thereafter
PW 4 saw that Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer) was bringing Bangabandhu downstair,
PW 4 was standing behind Major Bazlul Huda and
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury. They
said something to Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer). At that time Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman wanted to know something from them but
in reply Major Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant Colonel
SHMB Nur Chowdhury fired at him mercilessly by
their sten gun. Thereafter, Major Bazlul Huda,
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury and
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) came
down and went outside the gate to the road towards
south of the house. Thereafter Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman (Lancer) came back and got
down from the tank. He talked with Major Bazlul
Huda and other officers. Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman changed the badges of Major
Bazlul Huda and Subedar Major Abdul Wahab
Joarder in presence of Lieutenant Colonel Shariful
Huq Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur
Chowdhury, Lieutenant Colonel Md A Aziz Pasha,
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) and Major
Bazlul Huda and kept PW 4 in charge of the house
of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at Road
No.32, Dhanmondi. Later on, in the evening, he
took PW 4 to Mohammadpur to prepare the coffin
boxes. On 16th August, 1975, in the morning after
Fazar prayer nine dead bodies were taken away by
Supply Transport Company of the Army, At 9-
00/10-00 AM, Major Bazlul Huda took the dead
body of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in a
pick-up van to the Airport.

399. PW S in his examination-in-chief stated
that he was in One Field Artillery at Comilla and
Major Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Hug Dalim was
his CO and Major Bazlul Huda was his Adjutant. He
was transferred to Dhaka and was on guard duty
since 6-00 AM on 14th August, 1975 he saw Major
Bazlul Huda riding a motorcycle in Road No.32.
Dhanmondi at 5-00/5-30 in the evening on 14th
August, 1975. At about 4-00/4-15 AM in the mom
ing of 15th August, 1975, Subedar Major Abdu!

            
Wahab Joarder went there and checked the guard
and took their old ammunition on the plea of giving
new ammunition, At about 4-45 AM, PW 4 came to
take over his duty and while hoisting the flag sud-
denly a barrage of fire started coming from the south
and after S/7 minutes later Major Bazlul Huda and
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury came
there with khaki and black- dressed soldiers.

400. PW S also saw Major Bazlul Huda in the
aftemoon of 14th August, 1975 and also on 15th
August, 1975, he saw Major Bazlul Huda,
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury and a
force of 7/8 soldiers.

401. PW 6 stated that he was posted in One
Field Artillery at Comilla. They were in a group of
25 soldiers to guard the house of the then President
at Road No.32, Dhanmondi with Habilder PW 4 and
PW 5S. On his way to guard room, PW 5 made them
fall in at about 4-15/4-30 in front of the guard room
and took their ammunition. Thereafter, army forces
in 2/3 trucks came from the east and stopped 1/2
house to the west of the house of the then President.
They saw that the gun shots were coming from the
side of the lake to the south. They took shelter by the
side of the wall on the east side of the house. At that
time, PW 6 saw Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman was walking from the reception room to
first floor and thereafter Sheikh Kamal came down.
At that time Major Bazlul Huda and another officer
in khaki dress and officers and soldiers of Lancers in
black dresses came there and Major Bazlul Huda
and another officer shot Sheikh Kamal and he fell
down on the doorstep of the reception room but
Major Bazlul Huda shot him again. He also saw the
dead body of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman lying on the stairs. At that time Major
Bazlul Huda ordered the guards not to allow any
civilian to enter into the house and, in fact, Major
Bazlul Huda controlled the house of the President.
PW 7 in examination-in-chief stated that he joined
One Field Regiment at Comilla, where Lieutenant
Colonel Shariful Hug Dalim was serving as Second-
in-Command and Major Bazlul Huda was the
Adjutant. He was assigned with guard duty in the
house of the then President at the relevant time. On
Ist/2nd August, 1975, Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman was in command of Ist Bengal

Lancer Regiment. PW 7 heard announcement in the
morning of 15th August, 1975 made by Lieutenant
Colonel Shariful Haque Dalim that Sheikh Mujib
had been killed. He saw Major Bazlul Huda with the
badge of Major and Major Abdul Wahab Joarder
with a badge of Lieutenant.

402. Mr Khan Saifur Rahman, Mr Abdur
Razaque and Mr Al-Mamun, the learned Counsels
for accused-appellants, have submitted in unison
that charge of murder against convict appellants
under section 302 read with section 34 of the Penal
Code has not been proved on the basis of proper
evaluation and sifting of evidence on record and, as
such, miscarriage of justice has occurred. Mr Saifur
Rahman Khan has submitted that the confessional
statement of accused appellant Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar Rashid Khan were not true and voluntary.
Since those statements were recorded under duress
after prolonged remand in police custody which has
been rightly found by the learned first Judge of the
Division Bench and, accordingly he has disbelieved
the alleged confessional statement made by them.
The leamed Advocate has submitted that the second
learned Judge of the Division Bench without proper
consideration of the material evidence on record
wrongly found that the confessional statements were
true and voluntarily and, accordingly, accepted
those statements as legal piece of evidence against
the so-called confessing accuseds and the other co-accuseds in the case. Mr Khan Saifur Rahman has
also submitted that there was no conspiracy com-
mitted by the accused appellants. The learned
Advocates have submitted that the alleged confes-
sional statements were not true and voluntary and,
as such, these should not be taken into considera-
tion.

403. Mr Abdur Razaque Khan, the learned
Advocate appearing for the accused appellant
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid KI
has submitted that the High Court Division del
ered two separate parallel judgments and two indi-
vidual judgments and the same is not the judgment
in the eye of law. He then submitted that the First
Information Report having been lodged after 21
years after the date of occurrence, there was embel-
lishment in the facts of the case, He then submitted


            
that the accused appellant Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan was not present at the place
courrence, Trial Court as well as the High Court
on misconceived the evidence on record and
convicted the accused appellant Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan.

404. Mr Abdur Razaque Khan also has sub-
mitted that PW 57 Investigating Officer made
Seizure List as Exhibit 9 relating to service record of
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan
who stated that he was attached to the then President
Secretariat from 15-8-1975 till he joined the Foreign
Service and that he had been formerly absorbed in
the Foreign Ministry and that he had been promoted
to Lieutenant Colonel on 29-11-1977 and as such he
has no role in the alleged occurrence since he was
not physically present and none of the witnesses
stated his complicity in the commission of offence
and as such his conviction and sentence is liable to
be set aside.

405. Mr Abdullah-al-Mamun, appearing on
behalf of the accused appellant Major Bazlul Huda
and Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer), has
made identical submissions like Mr Saifur Rahman
Khan and Mr Abdur Razaque Khan. He has further
submitted that the alleged confessional statement
made by Major Bazlul Huda is not true and volun-
tary since the same was obtained after pro-longed
remand in police custody and he also stated that
since the first Judge of the Division Bench discard-
ed the confessional statement not being true and vol-
untary, the second learned Judge should not have
taken it into consideration. He has submitted both
the learned Judges of the Division Bench discarded
section 10 and, as such, confessional statement
alleging conspiracy by the accused appellant could
not be proved since section 10 of the Evidence Act
was not made applicable in a case where conspiracy
has gone beyond the stage of conspiracy and the
substantive offence has been committed in pur-
suance of conspiracy as in the instant case after
commission of the murder.

406. Mr Anisul Hug, the learned Special Prosecutor for the respondent State, and Mr Mahbubey Alam, learned Attorney-General, have submitted in
unison that the learned Sessions Judge of the trial
Court and the Hon'ble three Judges of the High
Court Division gave concurrent findings on Proper.
assessment of evidence on record; that the ACs
appellants have committed offence under Sections
302, 34 and 120B of the Penal Code. They have sub.
mitted that on careful scrutiny of the evidence Of the
witnesses it appears that out of the convict appey,
lants, Major Bazlul Huda, Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer) and Lieutenant Colonel Syeq
Faruque Rahman, went to the place of occurrence
House No.677, Road No.32, Dhanmondi and referring
to the relevant evidence of the eye-witnesses he
has asserted that Major Bazlul Huda shot at Sheikh
Kamal, Sheikh Naser and Bangabandhu Sheik
Mujibur Rahman, a Police Officer, placed on as
security guard of the residence of the President,
They. have contended that Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer) also participated in the commission
of the offence by making some gun shots towards
the lake, shooting towards .Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman and killing some of the inmates,
They have also referred to the evidence of witness-
es and showed that Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman took a leading role and conspired
in the killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman along with his family members and close
relations. and, as such, he managed the entire
episodes and events that took place from Balurghat
to New Airport, then at Cantonment area along with
various places and thereafter at House No.677, Road
No.32, Dhanmondi, Radio Station, near race course
and after the occurrence at Bangabhaban and there
by Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
played the principal role in the conspiracy and
killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
and 11 other persons of his family and two officials
at the residence Road No.32, Dhanmondi. All of
them committed the criminal act in furtherance of
common intention.

407. In respect of Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan and Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), they have submitted
that they have also took active part in furtherance of
common intention to kill Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman and members of his family, and
referring to the eye-witnesses, they submitted that
the eye-witnesses have witnessed them at designat-
ed places. They finally submitted that all the
accused appellants committed a conspiracy to kill

            
 Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and members of his family and ultimately killed them, It is
not a conspiracy to commit mutiny, and to that end
the learned Attorney-General and Mr Anisul Huq
have submitted that the accused-appellants first
assembled at Balurghat parade ground and proceeded towards their assigned places. They further submitted that from the evidence of witnesses previous conducts of the accused-appellants were relevant in finding their participation in the conspiracy and these accused-appellants moved to their designated places in furtherance of the common intention to commit murder and their subsequent acts after the murder of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and members of his family. Their presence at the Radio Station and at Bangabhaban also proved their participation in the conspiracy and the premeditated killing of the then President and members of his family. They submitted that there was no violation of section 377 of the CrPC As per sections 378 and 429 of the CrPC, since the Judges of the Division Bench were equally divided in their opinions, the case with their opinions thereon were laid before the Third learned Judge of the same Court who after such hearing delivered his opinion whereupon the judgment or order followed such opinion. In the light of the scrutiny of evidence and discussion, I am of the view that there is no illegality in the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division, which has been passed in accordance with law. As such, all the appeals are liable to be dismissed and the Death Reference is liable to be affirmed.

408. Scope and Jurisdiction of the Third
Learned Judge.
      In these appeals leave was granted on five
grounds, The first ground relates to scope and juris-
diction of the Third learned Judge.

409. In the instant case, the learned Sessions
Judge, Dhaka convicted 15 accused persons including the present 5 appellants under sections 120B,
302 and 34 of the Penal Code and sentenced them to
death. It appears that the learned Sessions Judge
though convicted the accuseds under section 120B
of the Penal Code, yet he did not pass any separate
sentence thereunder. As against the said judgment
and order of Sessions Judge, the accused-appellants
preferred separate appeals before a Division Bench
of the High Court Division. The first learned Judge
of Division Bench found the present appellants and
four others guilty for the offence charged against
them and upheld the conviction and sentence under
sections 302, 34 and 120B of the Penal Code, and
the judgment and order of Sessions Judge was there-
by affirmed in respect of those nine accused condemned convicts. The Death Reference so far as it
relates to the convict Captain Abdul Majed was confirmed by the learned presiding Judge with modification of conviction and sentence from sections 302, 34 and 120B of the Penal Code into section 120B of the Penal Code and sentenced him to death and his conviction and sentence under sections 302 and 34 was set aside. But the Death Reference so far as it
relates to the remaining six condemned convicts was
rejected including Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery) and, accordingly, Criminal
Appeal No.2617 of 198 was allowed by the learned
presiding Judge of the Division Bench. However,
the second learned Judge of the Division Bench
upheld convictions of all the fifteen accused convicts. In view of this division of opinions of the two
learned Judges of the Division Bench, the case with
their opinions thereon was laid before Md Fazlul
Karim, J the learned Third Judge of the High Court
Division under sections 378 and 429 of the CrPC
and such Judge after hearing as he thought fit delivered his opinion, and the judgment and order followed such opinion. We have already noticed that on the application of Major Huda, Lieutenant Colonel
Faruque and Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid the
Third learned Judge after hearing the parties as he
thought fit by judgment and order dated 6-2-2001
observed as under:

“In view of the discussion above and
equally divided opinion of the learned Judges of
the Division Bench, I am of the opinion that the
cases of above 9 condemned prisoners over
whom the learned Judges not being divided in
opinion are not contemplated to be heard both
under the provision of section 378 and 429 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. But only the
case of accused Abdul Mazed over whom there
is difference as regard the conviction under the
two separate sections of Penal Code and the
cases of those five other condemned prisoners
over which the learned Judges are equally

            
divided in opinion i.e. convicted by one learned
Judge and acquitted by another learned Judge,
are before this Court for an opinion, Upon
delivery of the opinion by this Court, the judgment and order shall follow such opinion in order to dispose of the entire death reference.”

410. Thereafter the Third learned Judge was
pleased to dispose of the Death Reference and the
connected appeals as per provisions of sections 378
and 429 of the CrPC It has transpired that the decisions of Supreme Court of the Sub-continent have not laid down a clear guideline as to how the Third learned Judge should deal with the cases where
there is a difference of opinion between the Judges
of the Division Bench. From a long series of cases,
it has come to our notice that the Supreme Court of
the Sub-continent has categorised the cases into two
broad groups. Firstly, where there is difference of
opinion in respect of all the accuseds i.e. where first
learned Judge acquitted all accuseds and the second
learned Judge convicted all, and secondly, when
there is difference of opinion either on evidence or
points of law leading to conviction under different
provisions of law or acquittal of some of the accused
persons. In this context, the position of this Apex
Court is not very clear. However, in the case of
Mohim Mondal vs State reported in 15 DLR 615,
where six accused persons were convicted under
sections 304 and 148 and other provisions of the
Penal Code, the learned companion Judge of the
Division Bench of the then Dhaka High Court differed only with regards to the conviction of accused
Mohim Mondal under section 148 of the Penal
Code. The case was laid before the Third learned
Judge under sections 378 and 429 of the CrPC. The
Third learned Judge, Murshed, J, as he then was
observed as under:

“Although my learned brothers have both
concurred in affirming the conviction of appellant Mahim Mondal under section 304 of the
Pakistan Penal Code as well as the sentence
pronounced upon him thereunder, the entire
case with regards to this appellant also is now
before me, inasmuch as there has been a dis-
agreement with regard to his conviction under
section 148 of the Penal Code.”

411. Murshed, J further observed as follows.

“Under the provisions of section 429
Criminal Procedure Code upon the difference
of opinion between the Judges the case has to
be laid before a Third Judge, and this necessarily means that the whole case has to be referred
to the Third Judge and not merely the point of
points on which the Judges differ. The judgment
or order shall follow the opinion given by the
Third Judge.”

412. So far as the concerned accused in
respect of whom there was difference of opinion the
whole case shall be laid before the Third learned
Judge who is duty bound to consider all the points
involved before he delivers his opinion upon the
case. In the case of State vs Abul Khair reported in
44 DLR 284, where two Judges of the Division
Bench were equally divided on the validity of conviction and sentence of two appellants, but they
agreed with regard to the conviction of one accused
i.e, Abul Khair. The case was laid before the Third
learned Judge under sections 378 and 429 of the
CrPC. The Third learned Judge dealt with the case
of two accused persons with regard to whom the
learned Judges of the Division Bench had differed.

413. In respect of the decisions of the Indian
Courts, we may refer to the case of Dharam Singh
vs State of UP reported in 1964 (1) CriLJ 78, where
it was held that in a trial of 12 accuseds, trial Court
convicted 10 accused persons under sections 302, 34
and 149 of the Indian Penal Code and acquitted two .
accused persons. The State preferred appeal against
the acquittal and 10 convicts preferred appeal
against the conviction. The learned Judges of the
Division Bench equally differed in their opinion.
Consequently, the matter was laid before the Third
learned Judge. The Third learned Judge concurring
with one of the Judges upholding the acquittal of
one of the appellants and set aside the acquittal of
one accused. The Supreme Court of India examined
the scope of section 429 CrPC in the following
words:

“All that section 429 says is opinion of the
two Judges who disagree shall be laid before
another Judge who, after giving such hearing, if
any, as he thinks fit, shall deliver his opinion

            
and the judgment or order should be in accordance with such opinion, Now it is obvious that
when the opinions of the two Judges are placed
before a Third Judge he would consider those
two opinions and give his own opinion and the
judgment has to follow the opinion of the Third
Judge. Consequently on that opinion is based
the judgment of the Court. For all practical purposes the Third Judge must consider the opinions of his two colleagues and then give his own opinion but to equate the requirements with appeals against acquittals is not justified by provisions of section 429 or by principle or precedent.”

In the case of Babu vs State of UP reported in
AIR 1965 SC 1467, where there was difference of
opinion between the two Judges of the High Court,
the matter was laid before the Third Judge. Supreme
Court of India held that section 429 of the CrPC
contemplates that it is for the Third Judge to decide
on what points he shall hear arguments, if any, and
that postulates that he is completely free in resolving
the difference as he thinks fit.

414. In the case of Hethubha vs State of
Gujrat reported in AIR 1970 SC 1266, there was difference of opinion between the two Judges of the
High Court Division and accordingly the matter was
laid to the Third learned Judge under section 429 of
the CrPC In this decision, Ray, J observed as
under—

“Counsel for the appellants contended first
that the Third learned Judge under section 429
of the Criminal Procedure Code could only deal
with the differences between the two learned
Judges and not with the whole case. The same
contention had been advanced before Mehta J,
in the High Court who rightly held that under
section 429 of the Criminal Procedure Code the
whole case was to be dealt with by him. The
Court in Babu vs State of Uttar Pradesh )1965)
2 SCR 771 = (AIR 1965 SC 1467) held that it
was for the Third learned Judge to decide on
what points the arguments would be heard and
therefore he was free to resolve the difference
as he thought fit. Mehta J, here dealt with the
whole case. Section 429 of the Criminal
Procedure Code states “that when the Judges

comprising the Court of Appeal are equally
divided in opinion, the case with their opinion
thereon shall be laid before another Judge of the
same Court and such Judge, after such hearing,
if any, as he thinks fit, shall deliver his opinion,
and the judgment and order shall follow such
opinion”, Two things are noticeable: first, that
the case shall be laid before another Judge, and,
secondly, the judgment and order will follow
the opinion of the Third learned Judge. It is,
therefore, manifest that the Third learned Judge
can or will deal with the whole case.”

415. In the case of Union of India vs BN
Anantha Padma Nabiah reported in AIR 197] SC
1836, there was difference of opinion with regard to
all the accused persons. Supreme Court of India held
that the Third learned Judge could deal with the
whole case. The language of section 429 of the
CrPC is explicit that the case with the opinion of the
Judges comprising the Court of Appeal shall be laid
before another Judge of the same Court. The other
noticeable feature in section 429 of the CrPC is that
the “judgment or order shall follow the opinion” of
the Third learned Judge.

416. In the case of State of Andhra Pradesh vs
PT Appaiah reported in AJR 198] SC 265, the
Judges of the High Court Division differed in opinion regarding all the accused persons. The Supreme
Court of India held that the Third Judge is competent to deal with the whole case and he is not bound
to confine his judgment only to the matter concerning difference of opinion between the other two Judges.

417. In the case of Tanviben Pankajkumar
Divetia vs State of Gujrat reported in (1997) SCC 7
156 = AIR (1997) SC 2193 the observation of
Supreme Court of India on identical provisions of
section 429 (own law) reads as under:

“The plain reading of section 392 clearly
indicates that it is for the Third Judge to decide
on what points he shall hear arguments, if any,
and it necessarily postulates that the Third
Judge is free to decide the appeal by resolving
the difference in the manner he thinks proper.”
Citing the case of Babu vs State of UP reported
in AIR 1966 SC 1467 it has been held that


            
where the Third Judge did not consider it necessary to decide a particular point on which
there had been difference of opinion between
the two Judges, but simply indicated that if at
all it was necessary for him to come to a decision on the point, he agreed with all that had
been said about by one of the two Judges, such
decision was in conformity with law. That the
Third Judge is free to decide the appeal in the
manner he thinks fit has been reiterated in
Hethubha vs State of Gujrat reported in AIR
1948 All 237 and Union of India vs BN Anantha
Padma Nabiah reported in AIR 1971 SC 1836.
In State of Andhra Pradesh vs PT Appaiah
reported in AJR 1981 SC 265 it has been held by
this Court that even in a case when both the
Judges had held that the accused was guilty but
there was difference of opinion as to the nature
of offence committed by the accused, it was
open to the Third Judge to decide the appeal by
holding that the accused was not guilty by considering the case on merit.”

418. While commenting on the scope and jurisdiction of the Third learned Judge the Supreme
Court of India in the case of Sajjan Singh vs State of
MP reported in (1999) 1 SCC 315 observed as follows:

“It is the Third Judge whose opinion matters; against the judgment that follows there from that an appeal lies to this Court by way of special leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution or under Article 134 of the Constitution or under section 379 of the Code. The Third Judge is, therefore, required to examine whole of the case independently and it can-
not be said that he is bound by that part of the
two opinions of the two Judges comprising the
Division Bench where there is to difference. As
a matter of fact the Third Judge is not bound by
any such opinion of the Division Bench. He
will not hear the matter as he is sitting in a
three-Judge Bench where the opinion of majority would prevail.”

419. In the case of Mattar vs State of UP
(2002) 6 SCC 460 where there was difference in
respect of only one accused person. The Supreme
Court of India observed—

“The Judges in different dissenting opinions have given detailed reasons, for and against the acceptance of the version as deposed
by these eyewitnesses. The Third learned
Judge, under these circumstances, was required
to independently examine the matter and
express his opinion. It is not permissible to only
or merely indicate the agreement with one or
the other view without giving reasons therefor.”


420. In the case of Sarat Chandra Mitra vs

Emperor reported in JLR 38 Cal 202, where the
High Court Division of India observed—

“Two points are worthy of note in connection with this section: first, that what is laid before another Judge is the “case” and, secondly, what the judgment or order follows is the opinion delivered by such Judge. I am not now concerned with the question of the trial of two prisoners with regard to one of whom the
Judges composing the Court of Appeal may be
agreed in their opinion, while as regards the
other the Judges may be equally divided in
opinion. In such a contingency it is quite possible to maintain the view that, upon a reasonable
interpretation of the term “case” what has to be
laid before another Judge is the case of the prisoner as to whom the Judges are equally divided
in opinion. I am now concerned only with the
contingency in which the Judges of the Court of
Appeal are equally divided in opinion upon the
question of guilt of one accused person, though
upon certain aspects of the case they may be
agreed in their view. In such a contingency,
what is laid before another Judge, is not the
point or points upon which the Judges are
equally divided in opinion, but the “case”. This
obviously means that, so far as the particular
accused is concerned, the whole case is laid
before the Third Judge, and it is his duty to con-
sider all the points involved, before he delivers
his opinion upon the case. The judgment or
order follows such opinion which need not necessarily be the opinion of the majority of the three Judges; for instance, at the original hearing of the appeal, one Judge may consider the prisoner not guilty, another Judge may consider him guilty under one section of the Indian Penal

            
Code, and liable to be punished in a certain
way: the Third Judge may find him guilty under
a different section and pass such sentence as he
It is this last opinion which prevails, subject to the provisions of section 377 of the Criminal Procedure Code  in the case of  confirmation of sentences of death.”

421. In the case of Ahmed Sher vs Emperor
reported in AJR 1931 Lah 513. In this case there is
difference in opinions against some of the accused
persons. There are in total 41 accused persons. First
Judge convicted 9 accuseds under sections 325, 149
and 147 of the Indian Penal Code and acquitted the
others. Both the two Judges acquitted all the accused
persons, On a suo motu appeal under section 302 the
case was laid before the Third Judge under section
429 of the CrPC It has been held that the Third
learned Judge has to look only as to the case of those
accused with regard to whom the two Judges had
differed. As regard the case of accused with regards
to whom the Judges had differed the Third Judge
could look at all the points not just point of difference.

422. In the case of Nemai Mondal vs State of
West Bengal reported in AJR 1966 Calcutta 194, the
two Judges differed in respect of some of the
accused persons and accordingly a Third Judge was
referred under section 429 of the Code. Mukharji, J
observed—

“What is laid before the Third Judge is “the
case” itself and not merely the points of difference or the views of difference. The case with the differing opinion is placed before the Third Judge. In other words, it is the duty of the Third Judge to decide “the case” and not merely the points on which the Judges differed. No doubt in doing so, the two differing opinions have to be considered by the Third Judge...........
At the same time, the word “case” normally
would mean in the case of a number of appellants,
the case of each appellant considered separately. In
other words, if out of three, two Judges of the
Division Bench agree on one and disagree in respect
of the other two appellants, then the “case” that is
referred to under section 429 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure is the case not of the appellants
on which they agree but the appellants on whom
they had disagreed. The case in such a context
means the case in respect of the appellants on which
the two Judges are equally divided. The words
“equally divided” in section 429 of the Criminals
Procedure Code seem to support that construction.”

423. In the case of Bhagat Ram vs State of
Rajasthan reported in AIR 1972 SC 1502, there was
difference of opinion in respect of only one accused
person. The matter was laid before the Third Judge
under section 429 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. The Supreme Court of India held—

“In view of the fact that the State appeal
against the acquittal of Bhagat Ram for
offences under sections 120B, 218, 347 and
389, IPC had been dismissed by the Division
Bench, it was, in our opinion, not permissible
for the Third Judge to reopen the matter and
convict Bhagat Ram for offences under sections
347, 389 and 120B IPC. The matter had been
referred under section 429 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure to Jagat Narayan, J because
there was a difference of opinion between
Tyagi, J and Lodha, J regarding the correctness
of the acquittal of Bhagat Ram for offences
under section 161, IPC and section 5(1) (a) of
Prevention of Corruption Act. Jagat Narayan, J
could go only into this aspect of the matter and
arrive at his conclusion.”

424. The Supreme Court further held—

“The present was not a case wherein the
entire matter relating to the acquittal or conviction of Bhagat Ram had been left open because
of a difference of opinion between the two
Judges. Had that been the position, the whole
case relating to Bhagat Ram could legitimately
be considered by Jagat Narayan, J and he could
have formed his own view of the matter regarding the correctness of the order of acquittal made by the trial Judge in respect of Bhagat Ram. On the contrary, as mentioned earlier, an express order had been made by the Division Bench upholding the acquittal of Bhagat Ram for offences under sections 120B, 218, 347 and 389, IPC and the State appeal in that respect had been dismissed. The above decision of the

            
Division Bench was binding upon Jagat
Narayan, J and he was in error in convicting
Bhagat Ram for offences under section 120B,
218 and 347, IPC despite the order of the
Division Bench. It was, in our opinion, not
within the competence of the learned Judge to
reopen the matter and pass the above order of
conviction in the face of the earlier order of the
Division Bench.”

425. In the case of State of UP vs Dan Singh
reported in (1997) 3 SCC 747, there was difference
of opinion against some of the accused persons.
Kirpal, J observed—

“What is clearly evident is that the appeal
is finally disposed of by the judgment and order
which follows the opinions of the Third Judge.
This being so special leave petition could only
have been filed after the appeal was disposed of
by the High Court vide its final order dated 19-
5-1998. Even though the said order purports to
relate only to ten out of thirty-two accuseds the
said order has to be read along with the earlier
order of 15-4-1987 and, in law, the effect would
be that the order dated 19-5-1998 will be
regarded as the final order whereby the appeal
of the State was partly allowed, with only two
of the thirty-two accused being convicted under
section 325 read with section 34, IPC, while all
the other accuseds were acquitted.”

426. In the case of Granade Venkata vs Corporation of Calcutta reported in 22 CWN 745.
Where Supreme Court of India held that in a case
referred under section 429, CrPC, a Third Judge
would not differ upon a point on which both the
referring Judges were agreed unless there were
strong grounds for doing so.

427. In the case of Mohammed Shafi vs
Crown reported in 6 DLR (WP) 104, there was difference of opinion in respect of single accused per-
son between two learned Judges of the High Court
and the matter was laid before the Third learned
Judge under section 429 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. It has been held that the Third learned
Judge before whom the case is laid under section
429 of the Code of Criminal Procedure exercises the
authority of a Bench of three Judges and therefore,
he should be considered not as a single Judge, but tig
a Bench, The case is not dealt with by a Single
Judge, but one which is dealt with by three Judges,
even though the Third Judge is dealing with it at a
later stage than the two disagreeing Judges.

428. In the case of Abdur Raziq vs State
reported in 16 DLR (WP) 73, where it has been held
that the plain reading of sections 378 and 429 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure shows that the Third
learned Judge to whom the case is referred need not
agree with the finding of either of the two Judges,
He is to give an independent opinion and then give
his finding.

429, From the careful scrutiny of the case
laws of the Sub-continent including the decisions of
our Apex Court it appears that when the Judges of
the Division Bench of the Court of Appeal are
equally divided in their opinion and the matter is
laid before the Third learned Judge, the case with
their opinions are laid before the Third Judge of the
same Court as per provisions of section 378 and 429
of the CrPC. Such Judge after such hearing as he
thinks fit shall deliver his opinion and the judgment
or order shall follow such opinion. The expression
“after such hearing (if any) as he thinks fit” envisages that it is completely the discretion of the Third
learned Judge as to how he will hear the case.

430. The Third learned Judge is completely
free to resolve the matter as he thinks fit in his full
discretion. According to section 429 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure the Third Judge is free to decide
on what point he shall hear argument. The expression “if any” postulates that the Third Judge is free
in resolving the difference between the two Judges
of the Division Bench. From a careful scrutiny of
the case law of the Sub-continent, mostly from the
decisions of the Supreme Court of India, the considered view is that it is for the Third Judge to decide on what points he shall hear the arguments whether he will hear the whole matter or only the part where difference in opinion lies between the two Judges it the Division Bench. From the provisions of section’ 378 and 429 of the CrPC, the expression “judgment! or order shall follow such opinion” postulates that it is the decision of the Third Judge which is the judgment

            
of the Court, in other words, the judgment of
the Court is based upon opinion of the Third Judge,
In the instant case we have seen that the Third
learned Judge Mohammad Fazlul Karim, J initially
heard an application separately filed on behalf of
some of the accused - appellants for hearing all the
appeals in respect of all the accused persons upon
whom there was a difference of opinion between the
Judges of the Division Bench, It has already been
noticed that the Third learned Judge after hearing
the application on this particular issue passed a separate order dated 6-2-2001 holding the case of 9
condemned prisoners over whom the learned Judges
of Division Bench were not divided in opinion are
not contemplated to be heard both under the provision of sections 378 and 429 of CrPC, and accordingly Third learned Judge decided to take up the hearing of six accused persons in respect of whom there was difference in opinions between the two Judges of the Division Bench. Having considered all
aspects of the case, the Third learned Judge upheld
the conviction confirming the death references so
far as it relates to Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid
Khan, Lieutenant Colonel Khandker Abdur Rashid,
Major Md Bazlul Huda, Lieutenant Colonel Shariful
Hoque Dalim, BU Lieutenant Colonel AKM Rashed
Chowdhury, Major AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer),
Lieutenant Colonel SHBM Nur Chowdhury, Lieu-
tenant Colonel Md Aziz Pasha, Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), Resalder Moslemuddin @ Moslehuddin and Captain Abdul Majed
and accordingly dismissed the Criminal Appeal
No.2616 of 1998 filed by accused Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Criminal Appeal
No.2604 of 1998 filed by accused Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan, Criminal
Appeal No.2613 of 1998 filed by accused Major Md
Bazlul Huda and Criminal Appeal No.2617 of 1998
filed by Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) were dismissed but rejected the Death
Reference No.30 of 1998 so far as it relates to
accused Captain Md Kismat Hashem, Major Ahmed
Shariful Hossain @ Shariful Islam and Captain
Nazimul Hossain Ansar, So it appears that the Third
learned Judge after proper compliance with the
Provisions of sections 378 and 429 of the CrPC has
decided the points on which he had to hear the arguments and in that matter the Third learned Judge was completely free in resolving the difference as he
thinks fit. So we do not find any illegality in the
judgment and order passed by the Third learned
Judge. Having gone through the record we also find
that the Third learned Judge delivered the judgment
in accordance with sections 378 and 429 of the
CrPC So we do not find any merit in the contention
of the accused appellants in this regard.

431. Delay in lodging FIR—On the second
ground of delay in lodging the First Information
Report (FIR), my learned brother Md Tafazzul
Islam, J in his judgment has extensively discussed
the facts, relevant laws, grounds of delay in lodging
the FIR including the background and the scenario
which then prevailed in Bangladesh after the assassination of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, along with members of his family and relations in the early hours of 15th August, 1975. My learned brother in his judgment has considered the respective opinions of the learned Judges of the High Court Division and
found that the learned Judges have given cogent reasons in believing the explanation of delay given by
the prosecution. Accordingly, my learned brother
has found that the delay in lodging FIR has been sufficiently explained. In that view of the matter, I fully
agree with my learned brother.

432. Mutiny Leading to Murder or Murder
Simpliciter The Third ground on which leave was
granted relates to as to whether the case concerns
mutiny leading to murder or murder simpliciter.

433. In reply to the submissions of the learned
Advocates for the accused-appellants, Mr Anisul
Hug, learned Advocate appearing for the respondent-State, has submitted that the statement in the
leave granting order whether it is mutiny leading to
murder or murder simpliciter is misconceived
because from the thorough scrutiny of the evidence
of the prosecution witnesses and the materials on
record, a case of murder has been made out, There
was no case of mutiny leading to murder and, as
such, the offences of mutiny and murder are two dis-
tinct offences. The offence of mutiny has not been
defined in the Army Act, 1952, However, Chapter 5


            
of the Army Act, 1952 provides for offences under
the Army Act and punishments for mutiny and
insubordination. Punishment for mutiny and insubordination has been provided in section 31 of the Amy Act, 1952. It appears that section 35 of the
Navy Ordinance, 1961 defines Mutiny which reads
as under:

5. In this Ordinance, mutiny means a
combination between two or more persons sub-
ject to service law, or between persons two at
least of whom are subject to service law—

(a) to overthrow or resist lawful authority
in the armed forces of Bangladesh or any forces
co-operating therewith or in any part of any of
the said forces;

(b) to disobey such authority in such circumstances as to make the disobedience subversive of discipline, or with the object of avoiding any duty or service, or in connection with operations against the enemy; or

(c) to impede the performance of any duty
or service in the armed forces of Bangladesh or
in any forces co-operating therewith, or in any
part of any of the said forces.”

434. The offence of murder has been defined
in section 300 of the Penal Code. When an offence
of mutiny is committed it is exclusively triable by
Court Martial. The offence of murder is not defined
under Chapter 5 of the Army Act. According to section 3(2) of the Army Act, ‘civil offence’ means an
offence committed in Bangladesh triable by a criminal Court. Criminal Court has been defined under
section 8 (7) of the Act as a Court of ordinary criminal justice in Bangladesh or established elsewhere
by the authority of the Government. Section 59 of
the Army Act deals with the civil offences. Sub-section (1) of section 59 of the Act provides that any
person subject to this Act who commits any civil
offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence
under this Act, and on conviction to be punished in
accordance with provisions of this Act. But sub-section (2) of section 59 provides that a person subject to this Act who commits an offence of murder
against a person not subject to this Act shall not be
dealt with under this Act unless he commits any of
the following offences:

(a) while on active service or
(b) at any place outside Bangladesh, or
(c) at frontier post.

435, This means that a case of murder cannot
be tried under the Army Act if the victims are not
subject to the Army Act, unless the perpetrator,
were persons subject to Army Act and on ‘active
service’ while committing the offence. Section 8(1)
of Army Act defines ‘active service’ as the time duping which such person is attached to a force engaged
in operation against an enemy or military operation,
or is on line of march to a place occupied by ay
enemy, or is part of a force engaged in military operation against a foreign country.

436. Suffice it to say, none of the accused per.
sons were on ‘active service’ as defined under section 8(1) of the Army Act. Accordingly, the accused
persons cannot be tried under the Army Act in view
of sub-section (2) of section 59, inasmuch as the
three alternative conditions enumerated therein have
not been satisfied.

437. Furthermore, sections 94 and 95 of the
Army Act, 1952 provides for the concurrent juris.
diction to the Court Martial and ordinary criminal
Court. section 94 envisages that in respect of a civil
offence, when a Court Martial and a criminal Court
have concurrent jurisdiction, the prescribed officer
of the Army has discretion to decide before which
Court the proceeding shall be instituted and if he
decides that the case shall be instituted before a
Court-Martial, it shall direct that the accused per-
sons be detained in military custody. However, in a
case under section 95 of the Army Act, when a criminal Court having jurisdiction is of the opinion that proceedings ought to be instituted before itself in respect of any civil offence, it may by written notice
require the prescribed officer to produce the offend-
er to nearest Magistrate or to postpone proceedings
pending a reference to the Government. Section 549
of the CrPC provides the procedures to be complied
with regarding a person liable to be tried by a Court
Martial by delivering them to the military authority.

438. On perusal of the Order No.1 dated 24-
3-1997, it appears that the learned Sessions Judge
sent a notice to the Chief of Staff Army under Rule
2 of CrPC Rule (Military Offenders),1958 in respect


            
of the trial in the Sessions Court, It also transpires
from the Order No,12 dated 3-4-1997 passed by the
learned Sessions Judge that there was memo sent by
the Judge Advocate, General Division, Dhaka
Cantonment dated 2-4-1997 under Memo
No. JAG not that there was no bar in
holding trial of retired Army Officers under the
Amy Act in the Sessions Court

439. In the instant case, it appears that the
learned Sessions Judge before proceeding with the
case has complied with the provisions of law by
issuing orders as stated above and the prescribed
officer in the instant case did not exercise his discretion to hold the trial before a Court-Martial.

440. In this case Mr Anisul Huq has referred
to the case of Joginder Singh vs Himachal Pradesh
reported in AJR 197] SC 500. Where the accused
being a Lance Naik in the Indian Army was charged
with rape of a ten years old girl, He was convicted
under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and not
by Court Martial. It was contended before the
Supreme Court that before trial of the Court, section
549 of the CrPC has not been complied with. The
Supreme Court dismissed the appeal holding that in
the absence of exercising discretion by the designated officer as to the forum of trial, the Army Act would not obviously be in the way of the criminal
Court exercising its ordinary jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of law.

441, In the case of Balbir Singh vs Punjab
reported in 1995 1 SCC 90 where the accused per-
sons were on the active service of the Air Force at
the time of commission of offence, but
Commanding Officer did not exercise his discretion
to decide before which Court the proceeding should
have been instituted. The accused persons were convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge under sections 302 and 149 of the Indian Penal Code. The
Supreme Court dismissed the appeal and observed
that the option to try a person subject to Air Force
Act who commits an offence while on active service
is in the first instance with the Air Force Authorities
and, as such, the accused has no option or right to
claim trial by a particular forum.

442. The prosecution in the instant case
examined 61 witnesses but none of them was cross examined on behalf of the defence in respect of
killing in the course of mutiny. From the record it
‘appears that no such plea was at the trial Court
by the defence at a belated stage while in the High
Court Division at the time of hearing of the death
reference and the respective appeals.

443. In the case of Haider Ali Khan vs State
reported in 1994 BLD (AD) 270 = 47 DLR (AD) 47,
the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court he
that the jurisdiction of the Court below
challenged in appeal at a belated stage. The same
principle has also been enunciated in the case of
Zulfiqur Ali Bhutto vs State reported in PLD 1979
SC 53, The learned Attorney-General has also point-
ed out that on behalf of the accused Syed Faruque
Rahman, the sitting of the Court at Nazim Uddin
Road was challenged by filing Writ Petition
No.2032 of 1997 which went up to the Appellate
Division reported in 49 DLR (AD) 157 and on behalf
of the accused Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan and
Syed Faruque Rahman, the vires of the Indemnity
Repeal Act,1997 was also challenged in the High
Court Division, which went up to the Appellate
Division reported in 3 BLC (AD) 89 but the accused
appellants never challenged the jurisdiction of the
Court on the ground that the murder was committed
in course of mutiny and the normal criminal Court
has no jurisdiction to try the offence.

444. On careful examination of the evidence
adduced by PW 8, PW 9 and PW 45, it appears that
they support the prosecution contention that the evidences do not disclose that the murders were committed in the course of mutiny. Both the first learned Judge and Third learned Judge in their judgment came to the conclusion that there was no case of mutiny leading to murder. No charge was framed rightly before the learned Sessions Judge. We also find substance in the submission of the learned
Attorney-General that the statement submitted by
the accused appellant Syed Faruque Rahman, Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan and Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) at the time of giving statement under section 342 of the CrPC did not mention that the murders on the 15th August, 1975 were committed in
course of mutiny.

445. We have found that the second and Third
learned Judges made concurrent findings on this


            
point holding that there is no illegality in holding
trial before the Court of Sessions. The forum of trial
is governed by procedural law and it is well established that the procedure followed by a civil Court is much fairer and transparent than the procedure followed in Court Martial. In that view of the matter, there is no question of prejudice caused to the convict appellant. In this end in the case of Jamil Hug vs Bangladesh reported in 34 DLR (AD) 125 at page 138, paragraph 37 the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court has quoted with approval of the
observations of Prof, Holland published in Law of
Court Martial (Current Legal Problem 1950 at page
193) which reads as follows:

“I would accordingly, suggest that the juris-
diction of Court Martial should be statutorily
confined to the offences against discipline and all
the jurisdiction over civil offences should be
taken away except where it is reasonable and
impracticable to arrange for a civil trial.”

446. We find that before pronouncement of
his judgment, the learned Sessions Judge vide his
orders dated 24-3-1997 and 2-4-1997 gave notice to
the concerned Army authority, and in reply the
Army Headquarter as per provisions of Criminal
Procedural Rules (Military Offenders), 1958 vide
Office Memo dated 2-4-1997 informed that there is
no bar in trying retired army personnel in the criminal Court and thereby complied with section 94 of
the Army Act. In view of the aforesaid discussions
and findings, I am of the view that since the
accused-appellants were not on active service with in the meaning of section 8(1) of the Army Act,
1952 the accused persons cannot be tried under the
Army Act and, as such, there was no offence of
mutiny leading to murder in the facts of the instant
case. Moreover, even if one were to accept for sake
of argument that offences committed were civil
offences within the meaning of section 8(2) read
with section 59(2) of the Army Act, there is no legal
bar in trying those accused persons in the Sessions
Court in compliance with the provisions of section
94 of the Army Act read with section 549 of the
CrPC. In that view of the matter, there is no legal bar
for trial of the accused appellants in the Criminal
Court in the relevant case, inasmuch as the offences
committed are in the nature of murder simpliciter.

447. Conspiracy for Murder or Conspiracy for
Committing Mutiny—The fourth ground on which
leave was granted concerned the question as to
whether it is case of criminal conspiracy for murder
or a case of conspiracy for committing mutiny. [p,
the instant case the convict appellants and other
accused persons were convicted under sections 302,
34 and 120B of the Penal Code. It has been asserted
on behalf of the accused-appellants that the evidence on record does not disclose the case of criminal conspiracy to commit murder of Bangabandhy
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and members of his family, but rather it disclosed a case of criminal conspiracy to commit mutiny to change the then Mujib Government. Confronted with such a situation, we
have already discussed above the provisions of sections 302 and 120B of the Penal Code. A criminal
conspiracy has been defined in section 120A of the
Penal Code. In order to constitute criminal conspiracy there must be an agreement of two or more per-
sons to do an illegal act or to do an act by illegal
means in furtherance of their common design,
Section 120B of the Code provides for punishment
of criminal conspiracy. So whenever a person is
found to be a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death or rigorous
imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards or
where no express provision is made in the Code for
the punishment of such conspiracy he will be punished in the same manner as if he had abeted such offence.

448. From the careful scrutiny of the evidence
of witnesses in the instant case, we will be dealing
with the involvement of the accused-appellants in
the conspiracy for the killing of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and members of his family, As stated above, the accused-appellants are
liable, amongst others, under section 120B of the
Penal Code for conspiracy. Here, it would be deter-
mined whether such conspiracy was for killing
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his fam-
ily members or for committing mutiny to change the
then Mujib Government. It is well established by the
apex Court of our country as well as the Supreme
Court of India that the evidence of conspiracy is
never palpable nor it is crystal clear rather criminal
conspiracy is always hatched in secrecy. It is always
impossible to get direct evidence for criminal conspiracy

            
 But however in the instant case the learned
Advocate for the respondent-State and the learned
Attorney-General has referred to the evidence of
PW 43 who deposed that in March,1975 Khondker
Moshtaq had attended a conference at BARD,
Comilla. After the conference Lieutenant Colonel
Khondker Abdur Ras relation of Khondker
Moshtag, accompanied by another army officer had
secret meeting in the rest house with Khondker
Moshtaque along with Mahbubul Alam Chashi,
Taheruddin Thakur where they had hatched conspiracy.
449. The evidence of the following witnesses
supports the prosecution case. PW 11 was in Ist Bengal Lancer whose commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Momin and his 2nd-in-command was Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and his squadron commander was Major AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer). There was a night parade in the night following 14th August, 1975.
Though he has not participated in the night parade
but on the direction of his SDM he went in front of
his store as the parade fell in there. PW 11 saw
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Resal-
der Muslehuddin, Major Mohiuddin, Major Ahmed
Shariful Hossain, Lieutenant Kismat Hashem,
Lieutenant Nazmul Hossain Ansar, Resalder Sarwar,
Major Nurul Hug, LD Abul Hashem Mridha,
Dafadar Marfat Ali and other NCOs and JCOs. By
the order of his SDM he went to “Kote” (light
armoury) at about 3-30 AM and took one G-3 rifle
with 18 rounds cartridge and a magazine. Then at 4-
30 in the morning he went to the residence of the
then President at Road No.32, Dhanmondi. Some
time later, a tank came and PW 1] saw Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and thereafter he
also saw Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer),
Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury and
Major Bazlul Huda, Resalder Sarwar, Subedar
Major and few others together went in front of the
gate of the residence of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman,

450. PW 12 was in Ist Bengal Lancer whose
Commanding Officer was Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman. As the substantive CO Major
Momin was on leave Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman was in-charge CO of the
Regiment. They assembled in the parade ground at 9
PM on the night following 14th August, 1975. In the
parade ground, Licutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman, Major Mohiuddin, Major Shamsuzzaman,
Captain Delwar Hossain, Lieutenant Kismat
Hashem, Lieutenant Nazmul Hossain Ansar,
Resalder Major Syed Ahmed, Resalder Moslemuddin, Resalder Mobarak, RDM Mosaddek Arshed
MDM Naeb, Resalder Malek, Naeb Resalder
Islam, Dafader Jabbar (PW 14), Dafader Haider
Lance Dafadar Lutfor Rahman, ALD Moslemuddin
ALD Mohsin and others were present. The parade
continued till 12-00 midnight. with a break of 20
minutes. The classes continued till 3-30 in the morning, again they fell in there. At that time Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Major Mohiuddin (Lancer), Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain,
Lieutenant Kismat Hashem, Lieutenant Nazmul
Hossain and the JCOs were discussing about something in the corner of the parade ground. PW 12 saw three unknown officers who were introduced by
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman as Major
Dalim and Captain Huda, but he could not remember the name of the other officer. Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman while briefing the troops
stated that Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was going to
declare monarchy in the meeting to be held at the
University on 15th August but they should not support monarchy and, as such, they must obey command of him and that of his officers. PW 12 saw that accused Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman was instigating his troops and flaring them up without disclosing his actual intentions but inciting them to accomplish his own mission. PW 12 and other troops from its Bengal Lancer and 2nd Field
Artillery Regiment started from Balurghat to the
then President's residence at Road No.32,
Dhanmondi, At that time PW 12 saw Lieutenant
Colonel Faruque Rahman in the t PW 12 proved
that Faruque took part in conspiracy by inciting,
arming and deploying the troops on the night fol-
lowing 14th August, 1975 and in the early hours of
15th August, 1975 and also his presence at Road
No.32, Dhanmondi in front of the residence of the
then President.
  
451.   PW 13 was in 1st Bengal Lancer. He made identical statements like PW 12, He also
attended in the parade ground in the night following
14th August, 1975 at 8-30 PM In the mid-night he
saw Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid
going with Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman. But some time later Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman returned to the unit. PW 13
as per order of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman accompanied by Resalder Moslemuddin,
Dafadar Marfat Ali and LD Abdul Hashem Mridha
in a truck went to the house of Sheikh Fazlul Huq
Moni and from there they went to the Road No.32,
Dhanmondi. He also heard gun shots from the house
of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Some
time later Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman came out of Road No.32, Dhanmondi in the
tank followed by the Resalder Moslemuddin alias
Moslehuddin and others. He saw Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant
Kismat Hashem inside the tank, PW 13 heard gun
shots from the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman but he did not go to that house. He
proved the presence of Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman who was in full command in front
of house of the then President at Road No.32,
Dhanmondi. This evidence of PW 13 was corroborated by PW 1 in material particulars stating that he had seen tank passing in front of the house of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. PW 13 was
also corroborated by the confessional statement of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery).

452. PW 14 was in 1st Bengal Lancer Regiment. He made identical statements like PW 12 and PW 13. He also attended the parade ground in the night following 14th August 1975. After the night parade he saw in the parade ground Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Major Mohiuddin (Lancer), Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain, Lieutenant Kismat Hashem, Nazmul Hossain Ansar and some other persons in civil dress, Accused Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman introduced Major Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar in civil dress. Accused Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman directed them to obey their orders. In the Radio Station he saw that Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan was coming from the radio station after 5-30 O'clock in the morning. PW 14 proved the presence of the accused Lieutenant Cole
Shahriar Rashid in the parade ground in the cantonment near Balurghat at 2-30 O'clock in the morning and at about 5-30 AM in the Radio Station, PW 24 also in his deposition stated that Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid went to the parade ground at about 3-00/3-15 AM on the night following on 14th August, 1975 where Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman briefed them in presence of their
CO, Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid
and other officers. Lieutenant Colonel Khondke;
Abdur Rashid and Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
introduced them with the dismissed officers, namely, Major Dalim, Major Rashid Chowdhury,
Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar and Captain Majed,
Then Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid ordered
them to take ammunitions from the unit. When they
started from the Lancer unit and stopped on a road
PW 24 also saw Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar,
Captain Majed and Captain Mostafa, He also saw
Major Dalim, Major Nur, Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar, Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur
Rashid, Major Rashed Chowdhury, Captain Majed,
Captain Mostafa and other officers went inside the
Radio Station.

PW 17 and PW 18 also made identical statements.

453. PW 23 deposed that they had night
parade on the night following 14th August, 1975. He
also made identical statements like PW 17 and PW
18, On being ordered the troops of B Squadron fell
in and Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
said that there was tank exercise and the tanks
would go outside. Out of 12 tanks, six were found fit
and six tanks were started with force and ammunition. At about 3-00/3-30 AM, Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman again returned there, and be
again left and there after returned at about 4-00
AM with Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain al
Shariful Islam and Captain Nazmul Hossain Anser.
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman had
boarded a tank placed in the front of the line,
Captain Md Kismat Hashem had boarded the next
one and Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain alias
Shariful Islam and others had boarded the rest. O"
the order of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque


            
Rahman, the tank fleet started to move. The evi-
dence of this prosecution witness shows that
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman had
organised his Lancer Regiment and commenced his
operation with immaculate precision without discle
ing his real intentions to the tank crew and the ordi-
nary sepoys. Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman in a very successful manner in getting the
and deployed in the city in the pretext of
tank exercise. According to the prosecution witness-
es, those tanks were deployed at designated places in
order to facilitate the killing of the then President and
also stop any resistance by any other force or person.

454. PW 24 was a Sepoy in 2nd Field
Artillery Regiment. They had night training pro-
gramme on 14th August. They were taken to the
New Airport at about 10-00/10-30 PM and during
the night parade at about 3-00/3-30 AM Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid arrived there and
directed them to go to another place for an urgent
duty and thereafter they were taken to Lancer Unit,
where Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
briefed them in presence of their CO, Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid and other officers.
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid and
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque introduced them
with the dismissed officers, namely, Major Dalim,
Major Rashid Chowdhury, Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar and Captain Majed. Then Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid and Lieutenant
Colonel Shariful Huq Dalim addressed them by stat-
ing that the Government had failed to protect the
honour of the womenfolk and the people are dying
of hunger, as such, the Government has to be over-
thrown. Thereafter Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid ordered them to take ammunition
from the unit. When they started from the Lancer
unit and stopped on a road, PW 24 also saw
Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar, Captain Majed and
Captain Mostafa. He also saw Major Dalim, Major
Nur, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar, Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid, Major Rashed
Chowdhury, Captain Majed, Captain Mostafa and
other officers going inside the Radio Station.

455. The cross-examination of PW 24 on
behalf of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
has been gbserved by ABM Khairul Haque.

456. The learned second Judge gave a detailed
reason stating that the witness gave deposition in his
examination-in-chief and also earlier cross examination on behalf of 5 accused persons.

457, PW 25 was also in 2nd Field Artillery.
He made identical statement like PW 12, PW 13 and
PW 14. He has attended in the night parade on the
night following 14th August, 1975. On the order of
Major Rashid they were grouped in different sec-
tions and marched to the New Airport. At about 3-
00/3-30 AM they marched on and reached the open
space for tanks and saw there tanks with forces. He
saw the accused Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid of the Lancer Unit. Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid with Major
Rashed Chowdhury, Captain Mostafa, Major Dalim,
Captain Majed and other officers briefed them.
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman,
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid and
Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Huq Dalim addressed
them inciting the troops against the Government
stating that the Government could not protect the
honour of the womenfolk of this country and the
people are dying of hunger, as such the Government
had to be overthrown. Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman asked them to take ammunition
from their Lancer Unit. Thereafter they were divid-
ed in six sections and proceeded towards the city in
six trucks. This witness was also on duty on the
north-east corner of the Radio Station. PW 25 cate-
gorically stated that Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman in collaboration with Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid and some disgrun-
tled dismissed officers incited the troops to achieve
their own mission,

458. PW 35 was Subedar Major in 2nd Field
Amtillery Regiment, He also stated in his deposition
that Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Amiillery) was commander of 2nd Field Artillery

            
Regiment. On the night follow 14th August,
1975 during night training, the accused Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid came together ina
jeep to the office of the accused Lieutenant Colonel
Khondker Abdur Rashid at about 10-00 PM. PW 35
correctly identified the accused Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faraque Rahman.

PW 39 was a lower driver in the Ist Bengal
Lancer Regiment, C Squadron. Their CO in charge
was Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman. He
also made identical statement like other PWs
According to him, parade started at about 7-30 PM
on the nigh following 14th August, 1975, At about
2-00/2-30 AM Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman, Major Shariful Islam, Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer), Lieutenant Kismat Hashem, Lieutenant
Nazmul Hossain Ansar, Resalder Moslemuddin and
others including the JCOs and NCOs were present.
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
addressed them that the tanks would go out for a
special task in an emergency of the country and
ordered them to take preparation and accordingly
the troops started to get ready with tanks. At the time
of his duty at Bangabhaban, he used to see Lieu-ten-
ant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Licutenant
Kismat Hashem, Lieutenant Nazmul Hossain Ansar
and Resalder Moslemuddin visiting Banga Bhaban
by jeep. PW 40 was Subedar Major in Ist Bengal
Lancer Regiment. He also stated about the night
parade on the night following 14th August, 1975. At
about 2-00/3-00 PM, he was informed that troops of
Antllery Regiment were coming. On being directed
by the Quarter Master, Captain Delwar, PW 40
handed over the key of the “Kote”. Later on he went
to the Quarter Guard himself, and the Quarter
Master JCO and the Guard Commander informed
him that the soldiers took away the arms and ammu-
nition, He saw Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman
and Major Rashid were talking by the side of a jeep
fitted with LMG. Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman told him to keep an eye on the regiment,
and on his query Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman said that they were going for overthrowing
the autocratic Government. On a further query from
him as to whether Shafiullah Shaheb knew about it,
Lieutenant Colonel Faruque replied that he did not
think it necessary. PW 40 deposed the last minute
consultations between Lieutenant Colonel Syeq
Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel Khondke,
Abdur Rashid presumably about the operation and
also about deployment of the tank, although even at
that point of time, the ordinary solders including py
40 did not know the actual object of the operation,

459. PW 44 deposed that on hearing the news
of the death of the then President, he rushed to Is
Bengal Regiment and found one tank in offensive
position with Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman
who fired from the tank on the lined-up trucks of
supply and transport company with his heavy
machine gun. 

460. PW 1 deposed that in the early morning of
Sth August, 1975 he saw Lieutenant Colone|
Faruque Rahman was asking something to Major
Bazlul Huda at the gate of the residence of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at Road
No,32, Dhanmondi and in reply he said “all are fin.
ished”, PW 1 saw Licutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman, Major Dalim, Major Nur, Major Bazlul
Huda in the residence of the then President at Road
No.32, Dhanmondi at the time of the occurrence and
thereafter.

461. From the aforesaid evidence of the wit-
nesses it appears that there was conspiracy for mur-
der of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman with
members of his family being hatched by the accused
persons to achieve their mission in furtherance of
the common intention of all the accused persons
This evidence of witnesses described the discus-
sions amongst the accused-appellants with the other
accused persons and thereafter briefing the troops
by accused Syed Faruque Rahman, Khondker Abdur
Rashid and Shariful Huq Dalim. While doing the
conspiracy as per briefing of Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman troops under the command
of both Lancer and Artillery Units including some
dismissed officers went to the Tejgaon Airport Road,
some of them to the house, of Abdur Rob
Shemiabat, Sheikh Fazlul Hoque Moni, some of
them at the Radio Station, Shahbagh and some went
to resist BDR and Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddia
Ahmed (Artillery) was sent with cannon to
Kalabagan Lake Side, Dhanmondi and to House
No.677, Road No. 32. Major Bazlul Huds.
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer), SHMB Nur

            
 Chowdhury and Md A, Aziz Pasha went to the residence of the then President. This scenario shows that deployment of troops in different places as stated above were deployed in furtherance of their premed itated plan to kill the then President with members of his family and relations also to resist any other force.

462, On careful scrutiny of the evidence of the
aforesaid prosecution witnesses, it appears that they
proved the prosecution case in corroborating case
other as to the allegation of conspiracy to commit
murder of the then President Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman and the members of his family and
thereby proved the case beyond reasonable doubt.

463. From the foregoing discussions and findings of the evidence of the prosecution witnesses, I am of the view that learned Judges of the High Court Division rightly found that conspiracy was started in
March,1975 at Lieutenant Colonel Rashid’s house at
cantonment, nurtured in different meetings between
Khondker Moshtaq Ahmed and the accused Army
Officers at BARD, Comilla and in Moshtaque’s
house at Daudkandi, Dhaka Aga Masi Lane, Ramna
Park, Shahriar Rashid’s residence at Cantonment
and Balurghat Parade Ground. Since all the accused
persons participated in the conspiracy and some of
them started in March,1975, some of them subsequently participated from March-August, 1975 and all of them were present in the Balurghat parade
ground and having been fully apprised and motivated
by Syed Faruque Rahman and Shariful Huq Dalim,
and as such, the accused persons including the
accused appellants participated in the assassination of the then President and the killing of members of his family and, as such, all of them are guilty for crimi-
nal conspiracy under section 120B of the Penal Code.
So relying on the case laws discussed above and the
materials on record, it can be safely held that there
was sufficient legal evidence on record that the
accused-appellants along with other accused persons
committed criminal conspiracy to murder the then
President Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
the members of his family. There was no case of
criminal conspiracy to commit mutiny which has
been rightly proved by the evidence of the witnesses.

464. Whether Charge of Murder has been
Proved on the Basis of Proper Evaluation and
Sifting of Evidence on Record :

Mr Khan Saifur Rahman, Abdur Razaque Khan
and Abdullah Al Mamun, the learned Advocates
appellants in all the appeals have submitted in unison that the charge of murder against convict appellants under sections 302 and 34 of the Penal Code on the basis of proper evaluation and the on record and thereby a appearing for the at as not been pro Advocate and Mr Mahbubey Alam, the learned Attomey General appearing for the respondent hi submitted in identical terms that both the trial Court
and the High Court Division made concurrent find-
ings of facts as to the complicity of the accused-
appellants in the commission of the offence. The
learned Attorney-General having referred to the evi-
dence of witnesses has submitted that the eye- wit-
nesses deposed that they had seen the presence of
Major Bazlul Huda, Major Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer) and Syed Faruque Rahman at the house of
the President Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman at Road No.32, Dhanmondi in committing
murder as stated above.

465. Since my learned brother Md Tafazzul
Islam, J in his judgment has elaborately referred to
the evidence of witnesses in respect of the arrival,
presence and participation of the accused-appellants
in the commission of the offence under sections 302,
34 and also 120B of the Penal Court, I shall be brief
in discussing relevant evidences.

Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, PW
44 was the commander of 46 Brigade. He deposed
that accused Appellant Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman was the 2 IC of First Bengal
Lancer. Syed Faruque Rahman did not fight for War
of Liberation and did not get seniority of two years
and for that he had grievance against Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. According to him,
Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman was the broth-
er-in-law of Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur
Rashid.

PW 43 stated in his deposition that Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid, Lieutenant
Colonel Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar Rashid and some other officers were pres-
ent in a secret meeting after the function at

            
Daudkandi Madrasha.

466. PW 11 stated in his deposition that
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman was 2 1C
of the Lancer Unit and there was a night parade on
the night following 14th August, 1975 though he did
not attend in the night parade as per direction of the
authority he went to the store room. Thereafter by
the order of SDM PW 11 went to the Kote straight-
away for arms. Accordingly, he went to the Kote at
about 3-30 AM and took one G-3 rifle with 18
rounds cartridge and a magazine. PW 11 with vehi-
cle came near the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman which was about 80 feet away
from the house at about 4-30 in the morning. He saw
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman in a tank
at Road No.32. Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman got down from the tank and talked with
Major Mohiuddin, Major Nur, Captain Huda. When
he went in front of the gate of the house of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and after
some time he saw Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman went away with the tank.

467. PW 12 in his deposition stated that there
was night parade on the night following 14th August
in which they attended till 3-30 AM. He saw three
unknown officers in uniform who were introduced
by Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman as
Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Huq Dalim and Major
Bazlul Huda. Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman briefed them that they cannot support
monarchy but Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was going to
declare monarchy next day and as such troops must
obey his orders as well as the orders of his officers
and ordered them to take ammunition from the kote
for the action. PW 12 through his evidence proved
that Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
instigated the troops without disclosing the real
intention.

468. PW 13 had also joined in the night
parade on the night following 14th August, 1975 at
8-30 PM. He also made identical statement like PW
14 as to the involvement of Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman at different stages. PW 13 first
went to the house of Sheik Fazlul Haque Moni and
from there he went to the house of the then President
at Road No.32, Dhanmondi. Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman came with a tank at Road
No.32, Dhanmondi along with other accused pe.
sons and asked them to go to the Radio Station. This
witness heard the sound of gun shots in the house of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. He say,
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman in front,
of the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib,
Rahman who was in charge of command of the sta.
tion. PW 44 also corroborated the statement of other
PWs, stating that Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman was in a tank.

469. PW 14 stated about the presence of
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman on the
night following on 14th August, 1975. After the
night parade he saw in the parade ground Lieutenant
Col Syed Faruque Rahman, Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer), Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain,
Lieutenant Kismat Hashem, Nazmul Hossain Ansar
and some other persons in civil dress. Accused
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman introduced Major Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar in
civil dress. Accused Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman directed them to obey their order. PW 14
proved the presence of the accused Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman at about 5-30 AM in
the Radio Station. PW 14 clearly stated that
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman was in
charge of the operation and he was mobilizing his
troops according to his premeditated plan. PW 20
was a driver of Lieutenant Colonel Jamil and on
15th August, 1975 he was deputed to Bangabhaban
for his duty where he saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, Major Dalim, Lieutenant Colenel
Shahriar Rashid Khan and other.

470. PW 23 stated that he attended parade on
the night following 14th August, 1975. He also
talked about the ten tanks which were cleaned
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman came
there and talked with Lieutenant Kismat Hashem. At
about 3-00/3-30 AM Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman again returned to Balurghat and on
his order officers and forces boarded in their respective tanks. According to PW 23, Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman left with tank at about 
00/4-30 AM PW 23 clearly stated that Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman has, organized his
Lancer Regiment and also commenced his operation


            
without disclosing his real intention to the troops
and he succeeded in getting the tanks ready and
deployed at different parts of the city in order to
facilitate the members of the troops to kill
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his fam-
ily members.

471. PW 24 also in his deposition stated about
the parade at about 3-00/3-15 AM on the night following on 14th August, 1975 where Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman briefed them in
presence of their CO, Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid and other officers, Lieutenant Col
Khondker Abdur Rashid and Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque introduced them with the dismissed
officers, namely, Major Dalim, Major Rashid
Chowdhury, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar and
Captain Majed. Then Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid ordered them to take ammunition
from the unit. Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman and Khondker Abdur Rashid asked them to
take ammunition. He also saw Lieutenant Colonel
Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery), Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan, Lieutenant Colonel
Khondker Abdur Rashid and other officers in the
Radio Station. PW 25 also stated about the night
parade on the following 14th August, 1975 where
Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid accompanied with
other officers briefed them.

472. PW 35 stated that Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque used to visit the office of Khandker
Abdur Rashid most frequently. On the night following 14th August, 1975 during the night parade
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and
Khondker Abdur Rashid together came to the office
of Khondker Abdur Rashid at about 10-00 PM and
after some time they left. He proved the presence of
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman on the
night following 14th August at Balurghat. He saw
that Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman was
taking necessary action before consultation and also
addressing the troops and inciting them against the
then Government.

473. PW 39 was a driver of First Bengal
Lancer Regiment. He also stated about the night
parade following 14th August at about 7-30 PM
According to him, parade continued till 12-00 mid-
night. But subsequently an order was passed to continue the parade till 2-00/ 2-30 AM and at about 2-30 AM Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque ordered
them to fall in where Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman and other officers including JCOs
were present. Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman addressed that they had to go for a special
duty to meet an urgency for the country. While he
was on duty he saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman in Bangabhaban.

474. PW 40 also stated about the night parade
on the night following 14th August at 12-00 mid-
night although he was on leave and he was taking
rest. He saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur
Rashid were talking by the side of LMG-fitted jeep.
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman told PW
40 to keep watch on the Regiment. In reply to the
query Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
replied that they would go to overthrow the Mujib
Government. In reply to a query whether General
Shafiullah knew Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman said that he did not think it necessary to
inform General Shafiullah. He also saw discussion
between Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
and Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid at
the deployment of the tank mobilization.

475. PW 44 stated that in the morning at 6-00
of 15th August, 1975 there was hard thurst on the
door and he opened the door and saw outside the
gate truck load of armed sepoys, Major Rashid said
“we have captured State Power under Khondaker
Moshtaque, Sheikh is killed, do not try to take any
action against us”. On hearing the news of the death
of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman he went
to the house of General Ziaur Rahman to get a jeep
and by that jeep proceeded to 1 Bengal Regiment
where at the gate he found Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman in a tank in offensive position and
from there Lieutenant Colonel Faruque fired by
heavy machine gun on the lined up vehicles of
Supply and Transport Company. Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman also went to the house of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to make the
final check thereon.

            
 476. The informant PW 1, eye-witness, in his
deposition stated in detail that after the death of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the
members of his family Major Bazlul Huda told
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, who
was at the gate that “all are finished”. At that time
tanks were moving on the road in front of the house
of the the President at Road No.32, Dhanmondi. PW
1 saw the presence of Licutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Huq
Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury
and Major Bazlul Huda in the house of the President
at the time of occurrence and also after the occurrence.

477. PW 42 also in his deposition stated about
the presence of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman in the Radio Station in the morning of 15th
August, 1975. PW 45 the then Army Chief of Staff
in his deposition stated that in 1975 Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman was 2 IC of Tank
Regiment. He deposed that in the evening of 1Sth
August there was swearing ceremony of the Council
of the Ministers and on 19th August he called a conference of Formation Commanders and in said conference Major Rashid and Lieutenant Colonel
Faruque Rahman were present.

478. It transpires from the above evidences
that Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman's
involvement in the commission of the offence at the
house of the President at Road No.32, his presence
at designated places including the house of the then
President at the time of the occurrence and mobilization and deployment of troops with arms and
ammunition at designated points including the
Balurghat Parade Ground, New Airport,
Cantonment Area, Radio Station at Shahbagh and
Bangabhaban have not been controverted by the
defence. Thus prosecution proved the guilt of the
accused-appellant, Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, under sections 302, 34 and 120B
of the Penal Code beyond reasonable doubt.

479, Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery).The learned Attorney-General and Mr Anisul
Hug, the learned Advocate for the respondent drew
our attention to the evidence of witnesses, namely,

PW 16, PW 17, PW 18, PW 21, PW 22, PW 24, PW
25, PW 26, PW 27, PW 29, PW 32, PW 34 and PW
and submits that the witnesses proved the com,
ty of the accused Lieutenant Colony
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) in the commission o¢
the offence,

480. PW 17 was Lance Naik in II Fielg
Artillery Regiment. He stated that Lieutenary;
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) was their,
commanding officer and Lieutenant Colonl;
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) was the commander
of Pappa Battery. He was also in the night parade of,
the night following 14th August, 1975 and for nigh,
parade there was fall-in at Regiment ground at
00/5-30 PM. Thereafter they reached at new
Airport, Balurghat with six cannons at about 6-30 in
the evening. The night training continued till 12-99
midnight and at the night practice he saw Major;
Khondker Abdur Rashid, Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) and other officer,
were discussing. Then he saw Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) behind cannons of
Papa Battery who gave some orders to Naib Subedar
Hashem, PW 17 was at the cannon of Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), the cannon
reached by the side of lake at Kalabagan at 4-00 in
the night and then on the order of Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) cannons
were stationed aiming at Bangabandhu’s house at
Road No.32, Dhanmondi and Rakkhibahini Head
Quarter facing north. After some time from the
house of Bangabandhu he heard sounds of firing of
light arms. Then on the order of Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) they fired four balls
of cannon and after some time by the order of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
their cannons were returned to the barrack.

481. PW 18 was a gunner of II Field Artillery
Regiment and he was in Papa Battery. On the night
following 14th August they fell-in with their arms
and cannons in front of MT Garage where
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
and other officers were present. On the order of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery),
Captain Jahangir took them with their cannons to
New Airport at Balurghat where training continued

            
 ill 12-00 /1-00. At about 3-30/4-00 AM Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) and Captain
Jahangir told them to get ready for special mission
as they had to resist Rokkhi Bahini from south,
Captain Jahangir directed them to board on their
respective Vehicles. After boarding on the vehicle he
saw four balls of cannon and a small arms and ultimately he came near the Dhanmondi play ground
and there found BHM Kamal and he ordered him to
fix his gun there and ordered to resist Rakhibahini
from south. He went to the north and while Fazar
Avan was going on they heard sound of shots from
the north-west and after some time heard sound of
firing of 4 cannon balls from a little north and after
passing of some more time Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) made order to get the
cannons together and thereupon he took the cannon
and personal arms to the vehicles and after some
time on the order of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery) his vehicle and others were sent
to north and the vehicle stopped before Ganabhaban
where Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) and others stayed for about (one) hour.

482. PW 21 was a sepoy of Papa Battery of II
Field Artillery. In his deposition he stated that
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
‘was a commander of Pappa Battery. He attended in
the night parade on the night following 14th August,
1975 and at 2-00 AM on 15th August, 1975
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery),
Major Khondker Abdur Rashid, Major Bazlul Huda
and some other officers were present. Major
Khondker Abdur Rashid ordered them to get ready
with arms and ammunitions for a special emergency
duty. They took arms and ammunition and boarded
on a truck and went to Road No.32, Dhanmondi at
4-00 /4-30 AM and they were directed not to allow
anybody to pass through the Road. At the time of
Fazar Azan they heard sound of shots from eastern
direction of place of duty and heard sound of firing
of cannon.

483. PW 22 was sepoy of II Field Artillery. In
his deposition he stated that there was a fall-in after
Magrib Prayer on 14th August in the evening. On
the order of Khondker Abdur Rashid they went to
New Airport at 9-00 PM and while was sitting on the
south end of runway then Khondker Abdur Rashid,

Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery),
Captain Mostafa, Major Bazlul Huda and some
other officers were there. There was an order not to
allow anybody to pass through Road No.32 and after
some time they heard sound of shots from the east
and simultaneously heard sounds of firing of can-
non. The evidence of PW 22 shows the presence of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) in
the parade ground in the night following 14th
August, 1975.

484, PW 27 stated that his battery command-
er was Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) and he was with him, PW 27 and 2/3 others were dropped at Kalabagan when they were
ordered by Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) not to allow any vehicle to pass through
the said road. PW 27 proved the presence of the
appellant Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) at New Airport at about 3-00/3-30
O'clock at night, at Kalabagan and at the
Ganabhaban.

485. PW 34 also proved the presence of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) in
the night parade on the night following 14th August,
1975 and also in the evening. He also saw that six
guns were taken to the New Airport. PW 34 saw
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
by the side of gun and he asked the troops to see that
none passes through the road. PW 34 heard sounds
of light arms from the north western corner and then
shells were fired from the gun by the side of
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery).

486. PW 35 also stated in his deposition that
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
was commander of 2nd Field Artillery Regiment. He
heard from PW 18 that Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) took most of his
troops to Dhanmondi.

From the aforementioned evidences, it transpires that Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) was present in the night parade on the night following 14th
August, 1975 where he had discussed in secret with
Major Khandaker Abdur Rashid and other officers
and he was in charge of the canons placed by the
lakeside of Kalabagan, where by his orders, canons
were pointed aiming at Bangabandhu Sheikh


            
 Mujibur Rahman's house at Road No. 32,
Dhanmondi and Rakhkhi Bahini's Headquarter fac-
ing the north, The incriminating part of above evi-
dences of PW s implicating Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) was not challenged during cross-exami-
nation and, as such, the evidences have proved the
charges against Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) under
sections 302, 34 and 120B of the Penal Code.

487, Major Bazlul Huda In reply to the submissions of Mr Abdullah-al-Mamun, the learned Advocate for the appellant Major Bazlul Huda, the learned Attorney-General and Mr Anisul Huq, the learned Advocate for the respondent-State have drawn our attention to the
findings of the facts of the trial Court as well as the
High Court Division in respect of the complicity of
the accused Major Bazlul Huda in the commission
of the offence and they have referred to the evidence
of PW 1, PW 4, PW 5, PW 6, PW 7, PW 8, PW 9,
PW 11, PW 12, PW 15, PW 21, PW 22, PW 42, PW
45, PW 47 and PW 60. Ina nutshell the evidence of
the leading witnesses are stated below.

488. PW 1, eye-witness, was the Resident PA
in the official residence of the then President
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his duty
was from 8-00 PM in the night following 14th
August, 1975. He spent his night there. At about 4-
30-5-00 AM on 15th August the President told him
to get in touch with the police control room. As he
could not do properly the President came down to
his room. Suddenly a barrage of gun shots was fired
on their windows. When the firing stopped the
President on his way enquired about the firing from
the army and police sentries present nearby. Then
Sheikh Kamal came down. At that time 3/4 Khaki
and Black dressed army personnel entered into the
house and Major Bazlul Huda fired at Kamal who
fell down in the room. They could not escape as they
were caught hold of by Major Bazlul Huda and put
them in line in front of the main gate of the house.
The Special Branch Officer standing on the line was.
shot down. Thereafier some of the accuseds went
upstairs shooting through the way. Ata time Major
Bazlul Huda who was at the gate told Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman that “all are fin-
ished”. Then PW | realised that the President of
Bangladesh along with his family members and

other inmates of the house were all brutally Killeg
According to the evidence of PW 1, it appears that
in the carly morning of 15th August, 1975
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Begum,
Mujib, Sheikh Kamal, Sheikh Naser, Sultana
Kamal, Rozy Jamal, Sheikh Russell and one Policg
Officer of the Special Branch were brutally Killed,
PW | saw the presence of Lieutenant Colonel Syeq
Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Hug
Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury
and Major Bazlul Huda in the house of the then
President at the time of occurrence and also after the
occurrence.

489. PW 4, eye-witness, was on duty to guard
the official residence of the then President. He stat
ed that while his companions were hoisting the
National Flag i» the early morning, a barrage of fire
was coming from the lake side. PW 4 saw Major
Bazlul Huda, Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur
Chowdhury and Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed at
the gate of the residence of the President. Major
Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur
Chowdhury came up to the verandah and seeing
Sheikh Kamal there, the accused Major Bazlul Huda
shot him by his stengun at the verandah and then
again went to the reception room. Major Bazlul
Huda and Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur
Chowdhury lined up the policemen and others.
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) accompa-
nied with Major Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant
Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury by shooting went
to the upstairs of the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman. Thereafter PW 4 saw that Major
AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) was bringing
Bangabandhu down stairs. PW 4 was standing
behind Major Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant Colonel
SHMB Nur Chowdhury. They said something to
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed. At that time
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman wanted to
know something from them but in reply Major
Bazlul Huda and Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nut
Chowdhury fired at him by their stengun. Thereafter
Major Bazlul Huda, Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur
Chowdhury and Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
came down and went out of the gate to the road t0
the south of the house. Thereafter Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman (Lancer) came and
got down from the tank. He talked to Major Bazlul

            
 Huda and other officers. Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman changed the badges of Major
Bazlul Huda and Subedar Major Abdul Wahab.
Joarder in presence of Lieutenant Colonel Shariful
Huq Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chow-
dhury, Lieutenant Colonel Md A Aziz Pasha, Major
AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed, At 9-00/10-00 AM Major
Barlul Huda took the dead body of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in a pick-up Van to the
Airport.

PW S, eye-witness, was in 1 Field Artillery and
handed over security duty of the then President's
official residence in the morning of 15th August,
1975 to PW 4, He deposed that Lieutenant Colonel
Shariful Hug Dalim was his CO, Major Bazlul Huda
was his adjutant. He was transferred to Dhaka and
was on guard duty since 6-00 AM on the night following 14th August. He saw Major Bazlul Huda riding a motorcycle in Road No.32 at 5-00/5-30 in the
afternoon on 14th August. At about 4-45 AM PW 4
came to take over his duty and while hoisting the
flag suddenly a barrage of fires started coming from
south and after 5/7 minutes later Major Bazlul Huda
and Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury
came there with khaki and black dressed soldiers.
PW 5 corroborated with the evidence of PW 1 and
PW 4 in material particulars. PW 5 also saw Major
Bazlul Huda on 14th August afternoon and also on
15th August noon with Lieutenant Colonel SHMB
Nur Chowdhury and 7/8 army personnel.

490. PW 6 also made identical statements like
PW 4 and PW 5 and corroborated them.

491. PW 2 and PW 3 being the eye-witnesses
of the occurrence also corroborated with the evidence of PW 1, PW 4, PW 5 and PW 6.

492. PW 7 deposed that he joined 1 Field
Regiment at Comilla. Lieutenant Colonel Shariful
Hug Dalim was at that time at Comilla and 2nd-in-
Command and Major Bazlul Huda was Adjutant. He
was assigned guard duty in the house of the then
President at the relevant time. PW 7 heard
announcement on the morning of 15th August made
by Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Huq Dalim that
Sheikh Mujib had been killed. He saw Major Bazlul
Huda with the badge of “Major” and Subedar Major
Abdul Wahab Joarder with a badge of “Lieutenant”.

493, PW 8 was Adjutant (Captain) of East
al Regiment, He was directed by his commanding officer to see the condition of the house of 
Bangabandhu at Road No.32, Dhanmondi and to
report to him and at about 8-45 AM of 15th August
PW 8 went to the Road No.32 and at the gate of the
house of Bangabandhu Major Nur and Major Bazlul
Huda received the PW 8. On query PW 8 told them
that chief of staff General Shafiullah had directed
him to report the condition of Bangabandhu’s house
and then Major Nur asked Major Bazlul Huda to
show the inside of the house and Captain Huda having taken them inside the house and then PW 8 saw dead body of Sheikh Kamal in reception room and other dead bodies inside the house.

494, PW 9 as per direction of chief of staff
came to the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman on 15th August at 3-00 PM and saw Major
Bazlul Huda at the gate of the house. Major Bazlul
Huda took him inside the house and saw dead body
of Sheikh Kamal and a police officer and in the stair
of first floor he saw dead body of the President
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and when he
went to the first floor then saw dead body of Begum
Mujib, Sheikh Jamal, Mrs. Jamal, Mrs Kamal and
Sheikh Russell,

PW 11 was in 1st Bengal Lancer who stated that
at the time of night parade the Army Officers went
to the office of Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer) which was situated opposite to the quarters
of PW 11 where he saw some unknown army officers in civil dress and at about 12-00 midnight he
saw Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) called
one person in civil dress as “Huda come here”. Then
Huda asked another one “Dalim wait”. At about 3-
30 AM Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer)
briefed his group and asked them to board on the
vehicle. PW 11 saw the said two persons in civil
dress now in army uniform one of them is a
“Major” and the other one is a “Captain”. He came
to know from Resalder Sarwar that they were Lieu-
tenant Colonel SHMB Nur Chowdhury and Major
Bazlul Huda. PW 11 with the vehicle came near the
house of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at
4-30 AM which was about 80 feet away from the
house. He heard reports of fierce gun shots from the
side of the house of the President and he also heard

            
 sound of 3/4 artillery gun shots, PW 11 was posted
outside the gate of the house of Bangabandhu with
direction not to allow any person to enter into the
house and then he saw Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer), Lieutenant Colonel SHMB Nur
Chowdhury and Major Bazlul Huda entered in the
house of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

495. PW 12 in his deposition stated that there
was night parade on the night following 14th
August, 1975 which was attended by them till 3-30
AM He saw three unknown officers in uniform who
were introduced by Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman as Lieutenant Colonel Shariful
Hug Dalim and Major Bazlul Huda. Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman briefed them that
they should not support monarchy but Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman was going to declare monarchy
next day and as such troops must obey his orders as
well as the orders of his officers and directed them
to take ammunitions from the Kote for the action.

496. PW 22 also made identical statements in
his deposition like PW 21. He also proved the pres-
ence of Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur
Rashid, Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) and Major Bazlul Huda and other officers
at the place of occurrence.

497. PW 21 a sepoy of II Field Artillery who
stated that they had night parade on the night fol-
lowing 14th August at New Airport. At 2-30 AM on
15th August, 1975 their CO the accused Lieutenant
Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid, Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) and Major
Bazlul Huda and other officers came there. Accused
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid direct-
ed them to get ready with their arms and ammuni-
tion.

498. PW 46 was a Typist in the Bangabhaban
who stated that in Bangabhaban in 15th August, 1975
he saw Major Bazlul Huda with Moshtaq Ahmed.

499, PW 47 was the Director of BDR. In his
deposition he stated that on 15th August, 1975 at
about 10-30 AM when he went to his Radio Station
he heard an announcement declaring the murder of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and from
there he with his companions were taken to the
Bangabhaban for oath ceremony and in the said ceremony there were Major Bazlul Huda, Major
Rashid, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque, Major Nur
Major Shahriar, Major Dalim, Major Aziz Pasha,
Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) and Resalder Moslem,
uddin,

500. PW 60, Director General, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh produced a file containing a letter dated 16th August
1976 (Exhibit 10/5A) issued by the Army
Headquarters about the services of the Arm,
Officers including Major Bazlul Huda and 11 other
accused persons were placed on deputation at the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs for employment in various Bangladesh Missions abroad.

501. It appears that the evidence of witnesses
implicating Major Bazlul Huda in the murder of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Sheik},
Kamal and Special Branch Officer as well as evidence of his presence in House No.677 and parade
ground and marching his convoy towards the house
of the then President have remained unchallenged
and, as such, the same proves Major Bazlul Huda’s
guilt in commission of the offence under sections
302, 34 and 120B of the Penal Code.

502. Major AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer)

In reply to the submissions of the defence
Counsel, the learned Attorney-General and Mr
Anisul Huq, the learned Advocate, have referred to
the evidence of PW 1, PW 4, PW 5, PW II, PW 12,
PW 13, PW 14, PW 39, PW 40, PW 42, PW 44, PW
47, PW 57 and PW 60.

503. PW 11 stated that at the time of night
parade the Army Officers went to the office of
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) which was
situated opposite to the quarters of PW 11 where he
saw some unknown army officers in civil dress and
at about 12-00 midnight he saw Major AKM
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) called one person in
civil dress as “Huda come here”. Then Huda asked
another one “Dalim wait”. Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer) briefed his group and asked them
to board on the vehicle. PW 11 with the vehicle
came at 4-30 AM near the house of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman which was about 80 feet
away from the house. He heard reports of fierce gun
shots from the side of the house of the then President

            
  and immediately thereafter he heard the words
‘hands up’, ‘hands up’. He also heard the sounds of
3/4 artillery gun shots, PW 11 was posted outside
the gate of the house of Banga Bandhu with orders,
not to allow anybody to enter/leave the house and
where he saw Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer), Lieutenant Colonel SIIMB Nur Chow-
dhury and Major Bazlul Huda entered in the house
of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

504. PW 12 in his deposition stated that Major
AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) made over night
parade on the night following 14th August which
was attended by them till 3-30 AM He also stated
that after taking arms and ammunition from “kote”
Major AKM_ Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) asked
them to board on a truck and Major AKM Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Lancer) was in the front seat of his
truck and Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer)
also briefed them and directed them not to allow any
vehicle to pass through Road No.32, Dhanmondi.

505. PW 13 also attended the parade ground
in the night following 14th August, 1975 at 8-30 PM
and the parade was finally made over by Major
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer). After the breakfast
having gone to the Road No.32 he saw Major
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) at the conjunction of
Road No.32, Dhanmondi. PW 13 proved the pres-
ence of Major Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) at the
parade ground and at Road No.32, Dhanmondi. PW
14 also made identical statements like other PWs.
As regard the night parade in the night following the
14th August, 1975 at Balurghat which ended at 2-
00/2-30 AM on 15th August, 1975 In the parade
ground he saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman, Major Mohiuddin (Lancer), Major Ahmed
Shariful Hossain, Lieutenant Kismat Hashem,
Nazmul Hossain Ansar and some other persons in
civil dress,

506. PW 44 was commander of 46 Brigade.
He deposed that at one stage of negotiation persons
including the Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Lancer) including the other accused persons after
the offence of 15th August, 1975 and Jail killing on
3rd November left the country, This shows the con-
vict Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) left
the country because of his involvement with the
offence of 15th August, 1975.

507. PW 60, Director General, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh pro-
duced a file containing a letter dated 16th August,
1976 (Exhibit-10/5A) issued by the Army Head-
quarters about the services of the Army Officers
including Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer)
and 11 other accused persons who were placed on
deputation in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for
employment in various Bangladesh Missions
abroad.

508. It appears from the aforesaid evidences
that the defence failed to challenge the statements of
PWs during cross-examination vis-a-vis the involve:
ment of Major AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer) in the
offence and as such the evidence of witnesses
remained uncontroverted and hence the prosecution
proved the guilt of the accused-appellant under sec-
tions 302, 34 and 120B of the Penal Code beyond
reasonable doubt.

509. Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan

The learned Attorney-General and Mr Anisul
Huq, the learned Advocate have referred to the evidence of PW 1, PW 14, PW 15, PW 20, PW 24, PW
37, PW 38, PW 42, PW 43, PW 44, PW 46, PW 47,
PW 48, PW 51 and PW 60.



510. We have already discussed the sum and
substance of the evidence of aforesaid witnesses.
But about the presence of Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan I like to discuss in brief. PW
43 stated in his deposition about the commission of
the offence at Road No.32, Dhanmondi. He stated
that there was conference in the house of Khondker
Moshtaq Ahmed with Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid Khan, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Ahmed, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid and
some other army officers in June/July, 1975. PW 14
stated that after the night parade on the night fol-
lowing 14th August he saw in the parade ground
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman intro-
duced Major Dalim and Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar in civil dress. Accused Lieutenant Colonel
Faruque Rahman directed them to obey their orders.
In the Radio Station he saw Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar Rashid coming from the Radio Station
after 5-30 AM.

            
 Sil, PW 14 proved the presence of the
accused Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan
in the parade ground in the cantonment near
Balurghat at 2-30 AM and at about 5-30 AM in the
Radio Station, Then Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faraque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel Khondker
Abdur Rashid ordered them to take ammunition
from the unit. When they started from the Lancer
unit and stopped on a road.

512. PW 24 also in his deposition stated that
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid went to
the parade ground at about 3-00/3-15 AM on the
night following on 14th August, 1975 where
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman briefed
them. Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid
and Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque introduced
them with the dismissed officers, namely, Major
Dalim, Major Rashid Chowdhury, Lieutenant
Colonel Shahriar and Captain Majed. Then
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid ordered
them to take ammunition from the unit. When they
started from the Lancer unit and stopped on a road
PW 24 also saw Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar,
Captain Majed and Captain Mostafa. He also saw
Major Dalim, Major Nur, Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar, Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur
Rashid, Major Rashed Chowdhury, Captain Majed,
Captain Mostafa and other officers to enter inside
the Radio Station,

513. PW 37 saw Khondker Moshtaq, Taher-
uddin Thakur, Major Dalim, Lieutenant Colonel
Shahriar in the Radio Station. PW 38 left the Radio
Station at 10-00 AM of 15th August, 1975 with the
permission of Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar.

514. PW 42 also saw Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and others in the Radio Station. In
Bangabhaban he also saw Major General Shafiullah,
Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman, Major Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Lancer) in the afternoon of 15th
August, 1975.

515. PW 48 saw Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan in the Radio Station as well
as in the Bangabhaban on 15th August, 1975.

516. PW 15, PW 20, PW 46, PW 47 also
proved the presence of the accused Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan in the
Bangabhaban.

517. PW 60, Director General, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Government of Bangladesh produced a file containing a letter dated 16th August,
1976 (Exhibit 10/5A) issued by the Army Heag.
quarters about the services of the Army Officer;
including Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shabrja,
Rashid Khan and 11 other accused persons why
were placed on deputation at the Ministry of Foreign,
Affairs for employment in yarious Banglades},
Missions abroad. PW 60 stated that Lieutenan,
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan was dismissed
from the Army but he was rewarded by the Foreign
Ministry which indicates his involvement in the
incident of 15th August, 1975.

518. From the evidences of the aforesaid
prosecution witnesses, which have remained uncontroverted, it is abundantly clear that the presence of Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan in the Balurghat Parade Ground on the night following 14th August, 1975, presence in the Cantonment in movement of troops, his presence in the radio station, commanding the troops in the radio station, presence in Bangabhaban and his appointment in the Government service and subsequent absorption in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for employment in
various Bangladesh Missions abroad prove his
involvement in the commission of the offences
under sections 302,34 and 120B of the Penal Code.
In particular, the evidences prove Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan’s presence
within the proximity of the place of occurrence.
Moreover, the evidences prove that Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan in furtherance
of the common intention performed his assignment
at the designated places including Balurghat Parade
Ground on the night following 14th August, 1975
and thus this proves his participation in the commis-
sion of the offence under sections 302, 34 and 120B
of the Penal Code.

519. At the fag end of the submissions, the
learned Advocates of the accused appellants have
submitted that, without prejudice to their submis-
sions of their plea of not guilty, the sentence of death
penalty be commuted to rigorous imprisonment for
life considering the age, social status and family circumstances

            
 of the accused-appellants. In reply the
learned Attomey-General and the learned Advocate
for the respondent State, Mr Anisul Huq, have
Opposed the prayer stating that the accused appellants are guilty of heinous crime committed against humanity by killing the Father of the Nation,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the then
President of the country along with members of his
family and relations and, as such, sentence of death
penalty should not be commuted.

§20. Having gone through the materials on
records, 1 have found that the accused appellants
committed gruesome murder of the Father of
Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
members of his family which included three women
and a minor child. Facts reveal that it is a pre meditated, well thought design to eliminate the entire
family of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, and some of his very close
relations who are very dear to him whose contribution and sacrifice in the liberation movement and
war of liberation should be highly remembered.
Since the accused-appellants have committed a
heinous crime, they do not deserve any sympathy
from this Court in getting commutation of death
penalty.

521. It is a pity that the surviving family
members of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
and the nation, as a whole, had to wait for about long
34 years to get justice by disposing of the criminal
case of the gruesome murder of the early morning of
1975. It has already been noticed that after the murder of Bangabandhu along with members of his
family and close relations in the early morning of
15th August, 1975 the Government of Khondker
Moshtaq Ahmed promulgated Indemnity Ordinance,
1975 and the subsequent Government took some
other steps to stop initiation of any criminal case in
respect of said gruesome murder of 15th August,
1975. Having gone through the evidence of the wit-
nesses and the materials on record we have been
shocked to notice that the then Government of
Khondker Moshtaq Ahmed and the subsequent
Governments, who were the beneficiary of the 1975
killings to the utter surprise and dismay of the nation
as a whole and the civilized society of the world
rewarded the murderers of the 15th August, 1975
being dismissed Army O1 and condemned convicts were illegally appointed in the Government
service and subsequently absorbed permanently in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for employment in
various Bangladesh missions abroad and thereby
undermining the constitutional process and fundamental human rights, conscience of the people and the ideals of the martyred freedom fighters who
have sacrificed their lives for the independence of
the country. It is unfortunate to note that some of
those accused persons according to the prosecution
were ‘self proclaimed killers’ and subsequently they
were also promoted to higher posts and some of
them were posted as diplomats in Bangladesh
Missions in various countries of the world. During
the course of his submission the learned Attorney
General in his choked voice has submitted before
the Court to make some observations so that this
kind of activities should not be repeated in future by
any Government of the country. In fact, all the
learned Counsels who appeared on behalf of the
respondent State in unison have prayed for such
observation before the Court. We totally disapprove
the aforesaid conduct, behaviour, mentalities and
activities of the Governments who were in power at
the relevant time and hope that this undesirable
activities which is shocking to the conscience of the
nation should not be repeated by any future
Government. We earnestly hope and believe that
tule of law, fundamental human rights, democratic
institution, overall the constitutional supremacy
should prevail in this country.

522. Having taken into consideration the facts
and circumstances of the case and upon detailed
analysis of the evidence and judgments of the
Courts below, I am of the view that there is no illegality in the judgment and order passed by the High Court Division, and accordingly I concur with my
learned brother Md Tafazzul Islam, J in dismissing
all the appeals and affirming the Death Reference.

SK Sinha J: I have read the draft judgment pre-
pared by my learned brother Mr Md Tafazzul Islam,
J It is a judgment so well written I respectfully agree
with the conclusions reached by him in all the
appeals. Keeping in view, however, the points
involved in these matters which are indeed a great

            
 public importance and in view of the questions of
law raised at the Bar, I wish to give my own reasons.

20 (twenty) Army Officers and other ranks
including the 5 (five) appellants Major Md Bazlul
Huda, Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman,
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahrior A. Rashid Khan,
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (artillery)
and Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed (lancer) were
prosecuted for the murder of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, then President of the Republic,
his wife Begum Fazilat-un-nessa, sons Sheikh
Kamal, Sheikh Jamal, Sheikh Russell, sons’ wives
Sultana Kamal, Rozy Jamal, brother Sheikh Naser,
Security members ASI Siddiqur Rahman, army
sepoy Shamsul Huq and Colonel Jamil before the
learned Sessions Judge, Dhaka, The appellants and
10 others were convicted under sections 302/34 and
section 120B of the Penal Code. They were sen-
tenced to death under sections 302/34 of the Penal
Code but no separate sentence was awarded under
section 120B of the Penal Code.

524. The appeals and confirmation proceed-
ings in the High Court Division were heard by a
Division Bench. The learned Judges concurred the
conviction and sentence in respect of 9 accused per-
sons including 4 appellants Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman,’ Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan, Major Md Bazlul Huda and
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed. They differed in
their opinion regarding the conviction of 6 accused
including the appellant Lieutenant Colonel Mohi-
ddin Ahmed (artillery). The first learned Judge
acquitted Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(artillery), Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain @
Shariful Islam, Captain Md Kismat Hashem,
Captain Nazmul Hossain Ansar and Resalder
Moslemuddin @ Mosleh Uddin of the charges. In
respect of Captain Abdul Majed the first learned
Judge acquitted him of the charge under sections
302/34 of the Penal Code but maintained his conviction under section 120B of the Penal Code. The
Second learned Judge maintained the conviction and
sentence of all accused persons and accepted the
death reference.

525. The matter was accordingly referred to a
Third leamed Judge Mr Mohammad Fazlul Karim, J
The Third learned Judge agreed with the Second
learned Judge as regards the conviction and sen.
tence of the appellant Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (artillery), Captain Abdul Majed and
Resalder Moslemuddin @ Mosleh Uddin. The Third
learned Judge also agreed with the first learned
Judge in respect of 3 (three) convicts. Prosecution
case has been exhaustively narrated by my learned
brother Mr Md Tafazzul Islam, J, so 1 do not con.
sider it necessary to repeat the same here. The
occurrence took place at dawn on 15th August, 1975
and over the said incident an FIR was lodged by
AFM Mohitul Islam (PW 1) with the Dhanmondi
Police Station on 2nd October, 1996.

526. The prosecution sought to establish its
case against the accused persons by the evidence of
47 (forty-seven) witnesses out of 60 witnesses
examined, the confessional statements of Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan and Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), the extra
judicial confession of Major Bazlul Huda, Lieu ten-
ant Colonel. Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan, Major
AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer), Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel
Khandaker Abdur Rashid, Major Shariful Haque
Dalim, Major Noor and Major Aziz Pasha proved by
Major (Retd) Shahadat Hossain Khan (PW 8) and
Commodore Golam Rabbani (PW 15), and the cir-
cumstantial evidence relating to the previous and
subsequent conducts of the appellants and other
accused persons. The accused persons including the
appellants asserted their innocence at the trial. The
confessional statements, according to them, were
not voluntarily made; the killing was result of a suc-
cessful revolt of the army against the then Govern-
ment.

527. Opinion of the Third Judge.

In view of the difference of opinion as regards
conviction of 6 accused persons, the Division Bench
by order dated 14th December, 2000 passed the fol-
lowing order:

“Death Reference accepted in part, Crl A.
2604 of 1998, 2613 of 1998, and 2616 of 1998
are dismissed. Crl A 2617 of 1998 is allowed by
Mr Justice Md Ruhul Amin by judgment in sep-
arate sheets. Death Reference accepted in part,
CrL.A. 2604 of 1998, 2613 of 1998, 2616 of

            
1998 and 2617 of 1998 are dismissed by Mr
Justice ABM Khairal Haque vide judgment in
separate sheets.” B.O.

“14-12-2000, As the judgment in Death
Reference No. 30 of 1998 is split one, let the
matter, as per provision of section 378 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure be placed before
the leamed Chief Justice for necessary orders.

Md Ruhul Amin
ABM Khairul Haque, JJ

528. Before the Third learned Judge the
appellants filed applications for hearing of the death
reference in respect of all the condemned prisoners
for ends of justice. The Third learned Judge heard
the learned Counsels at length and by a reasoned
order dated 6th February, 2001 rejected the applica-
tion. The operating portion of the order is as fol-
lows:

“In view of the discussion above and
equally divided opinion of the learned Judges of
the Division Bench, I am of the opinion that the
cases of above 9 condemned prisoners over
whom the learned Judges not being divided in
opinion are not contemplated to be heard both
under the provisions of sections 378 and 429
CrPC. But only the case of accused Abdul
Majed over whom there is difference as regards
the conviction under the two separate sections
of the Penal Code and the cases of those 5 other
condemned prisoners over which the learned
Judges are equally divided in opinion i.e. convicted (sic) by one learned Judge and acquitted
by another learned Judge are before this Court
for an opinion. Upon delivery of the opinion by
this Court, the judgment and order shall follow
such opinion in order to dispose of the entire
death reference.”

529. This is an independent speaking order
and the appellants have not taken any exception
against the aforesaid order of the Third learned
Judge. The appellants on accepting the views taken
by the learned Judge pressed the appeals and the reference without challenging the said order before this Court. The Third learned Judge thereupon by judgment and order dated 30th April, 2001 maintained
the conviction and sentence in respect of three condemned prisoners including the appellant Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (artillery) and accepted their death reference and finally disposed of the death reference, the operating portion of the judgment is as follows:

“In the result, the Death Reference No.30
of 1998 so far as it relates to Lieutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan, Lieutenant
Colonel Abdur Rashid, Major Md Bazlul Huda,
Lieutenant Colonel Shariful Hug Dalim, BU,
Lieutenant Colonel AMRashed Chowdhury,
Lieutenant Colonel AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer),
Lieutenant Colonel) SHBM Nur Chowdhury,
Lieutenant Colonel Md Aziz Pasha, Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery),
Resalder Moslem Uddin @ Moslehuddin and
Capt. Abdul Mazed is accepted confirming the
Death Sentence and accordingly, Criminal
Appeal No.2616 filed by accused Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Criminal
Appeal No.2604 of 1998 filed by accused
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid
Khan, Criminal Appeal No.2613 of 1998 filed
by accused Major Md Bazlul Huda and
Criminal Appeal No.2617 of 1998 filed by
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Antllery) are dismissed but Death Reference
No.30/98 so far as it relates to accused Capt.
Kismat Hashem, Major Ahmed Shariful
Hossain @ Shariful Islam and Captain Nazmul
Hossain Ansar is rejected and the conviction
and sentence of these accused are accordingly
set aside and thereby acquitting them of the
charges leveled against them in this case.”

530. Learned Counsels for the appellants
argued with circumlocution that since the learned
Judges of the Division Bench of the High Court
Division delivered dissenting judgments, the Third
leaned Judge ought to have heard the entire death
reference in respect of all the convicts but the
learned Judge heard the reference in respect of
6(six) convicts only, and thus the matter should be
remanded to the High Court Division for hearing of
the reference by the Third learned Judge afresh in
accordance with section of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (the Code). Mr Khan Saifur Rahman

            
 appearing for appellant Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Artillery) argued that there is no
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court
Division in the eye of law since the leamed Judges
expressed their opinions separately and signed their
respective opinion in violation of section 377 of the
Code, Learned Counsel further argued that since the
confirmation of the sentence and the appeals pre-
ferred by the convicts were heard analogously, sec-
tions 378 and 429 of the Code are applicable in the
case, Which required that when the Judges are equal-
ly divided in opinion, the case with their opinions
thereon, shall be laid before the Third Judge, and
such Judge after such hearing shall deliver his opin-
ion and the judgment and order shall follow such
opinion.

Learned Counsel further argued that in view of
the difference of opinion, the learned Chief Justice
referred to the Third learned Judge to dispose of the
entire death reference by order dated 15th January
2001, but the Third learned Judge without compre-
hending the purport of the order and the law heard
the reference in piecemeal basis—the reference was
not finally disposed of in the eye of law. The learned
Counsel stressed that in no way the opinion of the
learned Judges of the Division Bench could be taken
as concurrent opinion in respect of the appellants
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Lieu-
tenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan, Maj
AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed and Major Bazlul Huda.
In this connection learned Counsel drew our atten-
tion to the confessional statements of Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and Maj AKM
Mohiuddin Ahmed and contended that their confes-
sional statements were disbelieved by the first
leaned Judge as not voluntary and though the sec-
ond leamed Judge believed them as voluntary, the
Third learned Judge did not consider their confes-
sional statements on the reasoning that he was not
hearing their case on merit and thus, it could be said
that on an important point they concurred their opin-
ions. According to the learned Counsel, if their confessional statements were not believed by one of the learned Judges of the Division Bench as voluntary,
then how their opinions would have been concurrent?

531, It was contended on behalf of the Appel.
lant Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan that
there was no confirmation of sentence in the ¢Ye of
law since there was no consensus confirmation of

the sentence, Learned Counsel contended that the

“opinion of the learned Judges of the High Court,

Division were not judgments’ in accordance with
law since the confirmation of the sentence of the
accused persons were not made, passed and signed
by at least two Judges of the High Court Division, In
this contention, the learned Counsel drew our attention as to the meaning of “judgment” by referring Osborn’s Concise Law Dictionary, Aiyer’s Judicial Dictionary, Law Lexicon, Stroud’s Law Dictionary, and some decisions. Learned Counsel finally conended that in case of difference in opinion of the Judges of the Division Bench while confirming the sentence, the opinion of the Third Judge would pre-vail. Mr Abdullah-al-Mamun endorsed the above
submissions. The learned Counsels have referred the
cases of Muhammad Shafi vs Crown 6 DLR (WP)
104 (FB), Abdur Razig vs State, 16 DLR (WP) 73,
Hethubha vs State of Gujarat AIR 1970 SC 1266,
Union of India and another vs BN Ananti
Padmanabiah, 1971 SCC (Cri) 535 (AIR 1971 SC
1836), Sajjan Singh vs State of MP 1999 SCC (Cri)
44 and Mahim Mondal vs State 15 DLR 615 in sup-
port of their contentions.

532. Mr Anisul Hug, appearing for the State,
on the other hand, contended that the Third learned
Judge is perfectly justified in repelling the objection
of the convicts in not hearing the entire death refer-
ence and hearing of the case in respect of the six
accused convicts in respect of whom the Judges of
the Division Bench were equally divided in their
opinions, which was in accordance with section 378
of the Code. Mr Huq has taken us to sections 377,
378, and 429 of the Code and contended that section
377 relates to the procedure for the confirmation of
the sentence in respect of a reference made under
section 374 of the Code. According to Mr Huq, the
expressions “as he thinks fit” and “the judgment or
order shall follow such opinion” used in sections
378 and 429, are very significant. A close reading of
these expressions, Mr Huq argues, suggests that a
wide discretion has been given to the Third Ju
the legislature to decide in the facts of a given
when the opinion of the two Judges are placed


            
 before him whether or not he would hear the case in
respect of whom the Judges are not equally divided,
Mr Hug further argued that this being the exclusive
discretion of the Third Judge, if such Judge exercised his discretion judicially on consideration of
the materials on record, no exception could be taken
against such opinion, Mr Huq further argued that the
opinion of the Third Judge after hearing the case
either in respect of whom there is no difference of
opinion or in respect of whom there is difference of
opinion, and the judgment and order shall follow
such opinion. In this connection the leamed Counsel
has drawn our attention to the order dated 6th
February 2001 of the Third learned Judge and con-
tended that the Third learned Judge upon hearing the
Jeamed Counsels of both sides was of the opinion
that “the case of above 9 condemned prisoners over
whom the learned Judges not being divided in opin-
jon are not contemplated to be heard both under the
provision(s) of section (s) 378 and 429 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. But only the case of accused
Abdul Mazed over whom there is difference as
regard the conviction under the two separate sec-
tions of the Penal Code and the cases of those five
other condemned prisoners over which the learned
Judges are equally divided in opinion......” MrHuq
contended that the Third learned Judge had rightly
exercised his discretion in not hearing the case in
respect of 9(nine) convicts in respect of whom the
learned Judges were not equally divided, rather con-
curred with their opinions as regards the conviction
and sentence of the nine convicts and none of the
accused took any exception against such opinion. In
support of his contention, the learned Counsel has
referred the cases of Babu vs State of UP AIR 1965
SC 1467, Tanviben Pankaj Kumar Divetia vs State
of Gujarat (1997)7 SCC 156, Sarat Candra Mitra vs
Emperor ILR 38 Cal 202, Ahmed Sher vs Emperor
AIR 1931 Lah 513, Subedar Singh vs Emperor AIR
1943 Allahabad 272, Nemai Mondal vs State of West
Bengal AIR 1966 Calcutta 194, State of UP vs Dan
Singh (1997) 3 SCC 747, Granade Venkata vs
Corporation of Calcutta 22 CWN 745, State vs Abul
Khair 44 DLR 284.

The learned Attorney-General and Mr Ajmalul
Hossain while endorsing the submissions of Mr Huq
added some points and also cited some decisions.
Learned Attorney-General contended that when a

Bench of two Judges agreed upon a decision, both of
them required to sign the judgment in respect of
them but when a Bench comprising of more Judges,
the decision of the majority would be the decision in
the case, and in such case it was not necessary to
sign the judgment by at least two of them for confirmation, Mr Ajmalul Hossain contends that there is fundamental difference in sections 378 and 429,
inasmuch as, while in section 378 the expressions “a
bench of Judges” have been used, in section 429 the
expressions “the Judges composing the Court of
Appeal” have been used. Again, in section 429 the
expression “of the same Court” have not been used
in the other section. According to the learned
Counsel, the object of sending a reference to the
High Court Division is that unless the sentence is
confirmed by two or more Judges, the sentence
could not be executed. Learned Counsel added that
a reference is required to be heard by at least two
Judges and the expression “bench of Judges” used in
section 378 means the sentence required to have
been, confirmed and signed by at least two Judges
for execution. In that view of the matter, the learned
Counsel concluded that a close reading of sections
374-378 would infer that the question of opinion of
the Third Judge arose when there was difference of
opinion of a Bench of Judges, and in a case where
there was no difference of opinion in respect of a
particular accused, the Third Judge was left with no
business to deal with his case and to give his opinion.

533. Let us first consider the relevant provisions of law which are reproduced below :

“376 Power of High Court Division to con-
firm sentence or annul conviction. In any case
submitted under section 374, the High Court
Division—

(d) may confirm the sentence, or pass any
other sentence warranted by law, or

(e) may annul conviction, and convict the
accused of any offence of which the Sessions
Court might have convicted him, or order a new
trial on the same or an amended charge, or

(f) may acquit the accused person:

Provided that no order of confirmation
shall be made under this section until the period

            
allowed for preferring an appeal has expired, or,
if an appeal is presented within such period,
until such appeal is disposed of.

“377. In every case so submitted, the confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence
or order passed by the High Court Division
shall, when such Court consists of two or more
Judges, be made, passed and signed by at least
two of them.”

“378.When any such case is heard before a
bench of Judges and such Judges are equally
divided in opinion, the case, with their opinions
thereon, shall be laid before another Judge, and
such Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit
shall deliver his opinion, and the judgment or
order shall follow such opinion.”

“429. When the Judges composing the
Court of Appeal are equally divided in opinion,
the case, with their opinions thereon shall be
laid before another Judge of the same Court,
and such Judge after such hearing (if any) as he
thinks fit, shall deliver his opinion, and the
judgment or order shall follow such opinion.”

534. Section 429 corresponds to section 392

of the Code of 1973 (India) which reads as follows:

“392. Procedure where Judges of Court of
Appeal are equally divided—

When an appeal under this Chapter is heard
by a High Court before a Bench of Judges and
they are divided in opinion, the appeal, with
their opinions, shall be laid before another
Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such
hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver his opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that
opinion;

Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or where the appeal is laid
before another Judge under this section, that

Judge, so requires , the appeal shall be reheard
and decided by a larger Bench of Judges.”

535. The provision of section 392 was first introduced in the code of 1872 and prior to introduction of this provision such cases were governed by the Letters Paten. There was provision for further
appeal under clause 36 of the Letters Paten
from the opinion of the Third Judge. The Procedure
laid down by this section is not a right of any Panty,
but only a matter of procedure to be adopted by the
Court suo moto where there is a difference of opinion between the Judges. The Third Judge did not
constitute a Division Bench within the meaning of
the rules of the Calcutta High Court and thus, it was
not open to him to refer the point to a Full Bench,
and therefore, there was proposal for addition of a
proviso in section 378 in the Code of 1898 in the
Original Bill as under:

“Provided that, if any Judge being a member of such a Bench so desires, such case shall
be reheard before them and another Judge or, if
the Chief Justice or Judicial Commissioner so
direct, before three other Judges, and the
Judgment or order shall follow the opinion of
the majority of Judges so re-hearing such case.”

536. This proviso was dropped on the recom-
mendation of the select committee on the following
reasons:

“This amendment of section 378 has been
condemned by a majority of the Judges who
have expressed an opinion on the Bill. In view
of the fact that the difficulty which the amend-
ment is intended to meet is probably of rare
occurrence, and that the second portion of the
proviso will be inapplicable in the case of
Judicial Commissioners Courts which do not at
present consist of five Judges, we prefer to
leave the law as it is, and we have deleted this
clause.”

537. The proposed amendment to section 378
manifestly suggested that the legislature did not
intend to give finality of the opinion of the Third
Judge. It was proposed that if there was difference in
opinion between the Judges of the Division Bench
the case would be heard by a three member Bench
and the judgment and order shall follow the opinion
of the majority of Judges so rehearing such case.
The proposed amendment was dropped on the reasonings that there was probability of difference of

introduced in the Code of 1872 and prior to intro- opinion in rare cases and that the Judicial Commis-
duction of this provision such cases were governed _ sioners? Courts did not possess sufficient number of
by the Letters Patent. There was provision for fur- Judges for the constitution of larger Bench. In order

            
to speeding up the disposal of the cases, the Third
Judge has been given the power to give his own
opinion and it will be according to such opinion that
judgment will follow in the Code of 1898. In the
Indian new Code of 1973, almost similar provision
has been re-enacted by adding a proviso. The addi-
tion of a proviso authorises one of the Judges con-
stituting the Division Bench or the Third Judge if so
desires, can refer the reference to a larger Bench for
rehearing and decision by such Bench of Judges,
even if the Third Judge agreeing with one of the two
Judges. The intention of the legislature to re-intro-
duce the provision contained in the Code of 1872 is
obvious. If the Third Judge is not bound by any
opinion of the Division Bench where there is no dif-
ference of opinion, there was no necessity for the
legislature of re-introduction of the provision con-
tained in the Code of 1872 in section 392 of the
Code of 1973 as quoted above.

538. Previous legislation may be relevant to
the interpretation of later statutes in two ways. In the
first place, the course taken by legislation on a par-
ticular point indicates how the present Act can be
interpreted. Secondly, reference to a specific phrase
in an earlier Act may throw light on the meaning of
that phrase in a subsequent statute dealing with the
same subject matter. Subsequent Acts may also be
used as aids to interpretation. This is known as “par-
liamentary exposition” that is to say, the legislature
either deliberately sets out in the later Act the expo-
sition of the earlier for the purpose of explaining it,
or does so by implication i.e. by giving a definite
meaning to the same or a similar expression unex-
plained in the earlier Act.

539. Whenever a sentence of death is imposed
or passed by a Court of Sessions the proceedings of
the case shall be submitted to the High Court
Division for the confirmation of sentence under sec-
tion 374 of the Code. The power of the High Court
Division to confirm the sentence is provided in sec-
tion 376. In dealing with a submission of the pro-
ceedings under section 374 the High Court Division
itself acting on its appellate side power irrespective
of whether the accused who is sentenced to death
prefers an appeal, it is bound to consider the evi-
dence and arrive at an independent conclusion as to
the guilt or innocence of the accused. A duty is

imposed upon the High Court Division to satisfy
itself that the conviction of the accused is justified
on the evidence and that the sentence of death in the
circumstances of the case is appropriate one. There
is no statutory limit to the power of the High Court
Division in this connection. The High Court
Division considers the evidence carefully and
records its conclusions nearly after dealing with all
the points urged before it by the Counsel for the con-
demned prisoner. In dealing with confirmation
cases, it is of utmost importance that no room should
be left for any legitimate claim by the defence that
important points were argued before the High Court
Division that were not considered by it.

540. The language used in sections 378 and
429 of the Code is almost identical. It is said that in
hearing a reference or an appeal if the Judges are
equally divided in opinion thereon, the case with
their opinions shall be laid before a Third Judge for
hearing, and the Third Judge after hearing ‘as he
thinks fit’ would deliver his opinion, and the judg-
ment and order would follow such opinion. The
expressions “as he thinks fit” used in both the sec-
tions are significant. It is the Third Judge to decide
on what points or in respect of whom he shall hear
arguments. This postulates that the Third Judge is
completely free in resolving the difference as he
thinks fit. If he does not think to hear the arguments
in respect of any accused of whom the Judges are
not divided in their opinions, he may decline to do
so. The use of the words “equally divided” in both
the sections means the Judges differ in their opin-
ions, in respect of complicity of an accused or on the
charge framed against him or them or on any partic-
ular point it can be inferred that they are equally
divided but in a case where the Judges concur each
other in respect of a particular accused and in
respect of the offence charged, it cannot be said that
Judges are equally divided in respect of the accused
charged with.

541. The earlier uniform views of different
High Courts on construction of sections 378 and 429
are that what is laid before another Judge is the
“case” and secondly, the judgment or order shall fol-
low the opinion given by such Judge. The opinion of
the Third Judge will be regarded as the final
Judgment. In a case two accused persons were con-

            
victed, on appeal with regard to one of whom the
Judges composing the Court of appeal are agreed in
their opinions, while as regards the other Judges
were divided in opinion, in such a contingency it is
quite possible to maintain the view upon a reason-
able interpretation of the term ‘case’ what has to be
laid before another Judge is the case of the accused
in respect of whom the Judges are equally divided in
their opinions. The Courts are concerned only with
the contingency in which the Judges of the High
Court Division are equally divided in their opinions
upon the question of the guilt of one accused person,
though upon certain aspects of the case they may be
agreed in their views. In such a contingency, what is
laid before the Third Judge, is, not the point or
points upon which the Judges are equally divided in
their opinions but the ‘case’. This obviously means
that, so far as the particular accused is concerned the
whole case is laid before the Third Judge, and it is
his duty to consider all the points involved, before
he delivers his opinion upon the case. The judgment
or order shall follow such opinion which need not
necessarily be the opinion of the majority of the
three Judges. The case laid before a Third Judge is
the complete case, insofar as the two Judges who
first heard the appeal have differed as regards par-
ticular appellant or appellants, but not the case of the
other appellants as to whom they did not differ.

542. These views have been expressed in
Sarat Chandra Mitra vs Emperor ILR 38 Cal 202, as
follows:

“I am not now concerned with the question
of the trial of two petitioners with regards to
one of whom the Judges composing the Court
of Appeal may be agreed in their opinion, while
as regards the others the Judges may be equally
divided in opinion. In such a contingency it is
quite possible to maintain the view that, upon a
reasonable interpretation of the term “case”,
what has to be laid before another Judge is the
case of the prisoner as to whom the Judges are
equally divided in opinion. I am now concerned
only with the contingency in which the Judges
of the Court of Appeal are already divided in
opinion upon the question of the guilt of one
accused person, though upon certain aspects of
the case they may be agreed in their view. In

such a contingency, what is laid before another,
Judge, is, not the point or points upon which the
Judges are equally divided in opinion, but the
“case”. These obviously mean that, so far as the
particular accused is concerned, the whole case
is laid before the Third Judge, and it is his duty
to consider all the points involved, before he
delivers his opinion upon the case.”

543. These views have been followed in
Ahmed Sher vs Emperor AIR 1931(Lah) 5}3
Subeder Singh vs Emperor, AIR 1943 All 272, Nema
Mandal vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1966 Cal 194
The views of the Supreme Court of India on the
point are not uniform. One view is that the Third
Judge is required to examine the whole case independently and that he is not bound by the two options of the two Judges comprising the Division
Bench even if there is no difference in respect of any
one of the accused persons. The other view is that it
is the discretion of the Third Judge to decide on
what points he shall hear the arguments, if any, and
he is completely free in resolving the difference.

544. Sometimes the Judges of the Division
Bench may differ in their opinions on any point but
if they agree with the ultimate conclusions reached
by the Court of Sessions and confirm the sentence,
it cannot be said that the Judges are equally divided
in their opinions. Section 377 provides that in every
case so submitted, the confirmation of sentence or
any new sentence or order passed by the High Court
Division, shall, when such Court consists of two or
more Judges, be made, passed, and signed by at least
two of them. This section deals with the procedure
as to the manner of signing the confirmation of sen-
tence of death where the Court consists of two or
more Judges the order of confirmation of sentence
of death should be signed by at least both of them. If
the sentence of death is confirmed by one of them,
the sentence of death is not validly confirmed with-
in the meaning of section 377, which enacts that any
order made on a reference shall be by a Bench con
sisting of at least two Judges. When the Judges con-
sisting the Division Bench are equally divided in
their opinions the case shall be decided in the man-
ner provided by section 378 read with section 429 o!
the Code, i.e. the case with their opinions shall be
laid before the Third Judge. The expression differ

            
ence of opinion as used in the sections may be either
as regards the guilt or innocence of the accused or as
to the proper sentence to be passed. In either of these cases the sections require the reference to be made to another Judge, The Judge before whom the case is laid for his opinion is entitled to pass any order he thinks proper including an order directing retrial of the accused. While confirming the sentence one Judge May not accept a piece of evidence but
accepts the conviction and sentence in respect of an
accused person that does not mean that there is dif-
ference of opinion as regards conviction and sen-
tence. Therefore, the moot question is whether the
Judges of the Division Bench have confirmed the
conviction and sentence within the meaning of sec-
tion 377 of the Code.

545. In the case of Babu vs State of UP, AIR
1965 SC 1467, five members Constitutional Bench
of the Supreme Court of India considered the true
purport and power of the Third Judge. In that case
the Division Bench differed in their opinions in
respect of the conviction of three accused persons
and delivered two separate opinions. The case was
laid to Takru, J who agreed with Mathur, J in accept-
ing the prosecution case. The appeals of the convicts
were accordingly dismissed. On the application for
certificate of fitness the two Judges who heard the
appeals, again deferred. Mathur, J was in favour of
refusing certificate while Gyanendra Kumar, J was
for granting it. He was of the opinion that the main
point of difference earlier was over the authenticity
of the FIR, and Takru, J had merely stated that if it
was necessary for him to decide the point he would
have agreed with Mathur, J and could have accepted
the FIR as genuine. Gyanendra, J was of the opinion
that this matter which was fully argued before
Takru, J was not discussed by him in detail. The
matter was again laid before Boome, J who agreed
with Gyanendra, J on the point that Takru, J had not
gone into the authenticity of the FIR. He was in
favour of granting certificate. Before the Supreme
Court the competency of the appeal was raised, it
was observed as follows:

“The section (s 429) contemplates that it is
for the Third Judge to decide on what points he
shall hear the arguments, if any, and that postu-
lates that he is completely free in resolving the
difference he thinks fit. In our judgment, it
was sufficient for Takru, J to have said on the
question of the First Information Report that he
did not consider it necessary to decide the point
but if it was necessary he was in agreement with
all that Mathur, J had said. There was, therefore,
a proper decision by Takru, J and the certificate
could not be based upon the omission to discuss
the First Information Report and the doubts
about it.”

546. In the case of Hethubha, AIR 1970 SC
1266, three accused persons were charged for mur-
der and other offences. The trial Court acquitted all
the accused persons of the charge under sections
302/34 of the Penal Code; it however, convicted all
the accused under section 304 Part II read with sec-
tion 34 of the Penal Code. Two accused persons
were also convicted under section 323 and another
under sections 323/34 of the Penal Code. Accused
persons preferred appeal from the aforesaid convic-
tion and sentence. A Division Bench of the Gujrat
High Court heard the appeal. One Judge Divan, J
found accused No.1 guilty under section 302 of the
Penal Code and the other two accused guilty under
section 324/34 of the Penal Code. Another Judge
Shelat, J acquitted all the accused persons of the
charges. The matter was referred to a Third Judge,
Mehta, J who heard the appeal found the accused
No.1 guilty under section 302 and other two accused
guilty under section 302/34 of the Penal Code. He
also maintained the conviction of first two accused
under section 323 of the Penal Code and the Third
accused under sections 323/34 of the Penal Code.
The convicts went to the Supreme Court of India. It
was contended on behalf of the convicts that the
Third Judge erred in law in disposing of the whole
case in violation of section 429 of the Code. The
Supreme Court of India approved the views taken in
the case of Babu (Supra) and observed as follows:

“Ths Court in Babu vs State of Uttar
Pradesh, (1965) 2 SCR 771= (AIR 1965 SC
1467) held that it was for the Third learned
Judge to decide on what points the arguments
would be heard and therefore he was free to
resolve the differences as he thought fit. Mehta,
J, here dealt with the whole case. Section 429 of
the Criminal Procedure Code states "that when


            
 the Judges comprising the Court of Appeal are
equally divided in opinion, the case of their
opinion thereon, shall be laid before another
Judge of the same Court and such Judge, after
h hearing, if any, as he thinks fit, shall deliv-
er his opinion, and the Judgment and order shall
follow such opinion”. Two things are notice-
able; first, that the case shall be laid before
another Judge, and, secondly, the Judgment and
order will follow the opinion of the Third
leamed Judge. It is, therefore, manifest that the
Third learned Judge can or will deal with the
whole case.”

547. In Tanviben Pankaj Kumar Divetia vs
State of Gujrat, AIR 1997 SC 2193, (1997(7) SCC
156) the views taken in AJR 1965 SC 1467 have
been approved and observed thus:

“The plain reading of section 392 (our sec-
tion 429) clearly indicates that it is for the Third
Judge to decide on what points he shall hear
arguments, if any, and it necessarily postulates
that the Third Judge is free to decide the appeal
by resolving the difference in the manner he
thinks proper.”

548. In State of UP vs Dan Singh, (1997) 3
SCC 747, thirty-two accused persons were tried for
various offences including under sections 302/149
IPC The trial Court acquitted all the accused. On an
appeal filed by the State, there was difference of
opinion between two Judges comprising the
Division Bench BN Katju, J convicted two accused
under section 325/34, IPC and acquitted other
accused. Rajeswar Singh, J convicted six accused on
all counts. Both the Judges agreed in respect of 22
accused and there was difference of opinion with
regard to 6 other accused and 4 women accused. The
Third Judge Mathur, J who agreed with the opinion
of Katju, J State of UP obtained leave against all
accused except the four women accused on the
ground that the appeal against the accused, qua
whom State’s appeal was dismissed by the Division
Bench had become final and no appeal has been
filled against the final order of the Third Judge. It
was contended on behalf of the accused-respon-
dents, the appeal against the 22 accused whose the
state’s appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench
on 15th April, 1987 had become final, that the
appeal was filed against the final opinion dated 19th
April, 1988 of the Third Judge, that this order per.
tains to the four women accused and six others, he
special leave having not granted against acquittal of
four women, the appeal should be confined to Six
accused only in respect of which there was difference of opinion which was referred to the Third
Judge. The Supreme Court repelled the contention
observing that as there was difference of opinion of
the Division Bench, the opinion of the Third Judge
would prevail. Two members Bench of the Supreme
Court observed as follows:

“When the appeal as a whole is heard by
the Third Judge, he not only has an option of
delivering his opinion but, under the proviso to
section 392 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
he may require the appeal to be reheard and
decided by a larger Bench of Judges. This was
an option which, under the provision, was also
open for any one of the two Judges, namely, BN
Katju and Rajeshwar Singh, JJ to exercise, but
they chose not to do so. What is clearly evident
is that the appeal is finally disposed of by the
judgment and order which follows the opinion
of the Third Judge. This being so special leave
petition could only have been filed after the
appeal was disposed of by the High Court vide
its final order dated 19-5-1988. Even though the
said order purports to be related only to ten out
of thirty-two accused the said order has to be
read along with the earlier order of 15-4-1987
and, in law, the effect would be that the order
dated 19-5-1988 will be regarded as the final
order whereby the appeal of the State was part-
ly allowed, with only two of the thirty-two
accused being convicted under section 325 read
with section 34, IPC, while all the other accused
were acquitted.”

549. In Sajjan Singh (1999 SCC 44). 11
accused persons faced trial before the Sessions
Judge, of them, the Sessions Judge convicted 10
accused persons under section 404 of the Penal
Code. The convicts preferred one appeal and the
State also preferred one appeal against the order of
acquittal. The Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh
High Court dismissed the appeal preferred by the
State. As regards the other appeal of 10 convicts, the

            
 Judges were equally divided in their opinions. One
Judge gave his opinion that the conviction of all the
accused should be upheld and the other Judge held
that the conviction of 3 accused should be upheld
and the rest be acquitted. The matter was referred to
a Third Judge under section 392 of the Code who
upheld the conviction of 6 persons and acquitted the
other 4 accused. The Third Judge did not consider
the case of 3 convicts as the Division Bench was not
equally divided in respect of their conviction, A
Division Bench of the Supreme Court ignoring the
views taken in 47R 1965 SC 1467 and AIR 1970 SC
1266 did not approve the opinion taken by the Third
Judge and observed as follows:

“Statement of law is now quite explicit. It
is the Third Judge whose opinion matters;
against the judgment that follows therefrom that
an appeal lies to this Court by way of special
leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution or under Article 134 of the Constitution
or under section 379 of the Code. The Third
Judge is, therefore, required to examine whole
of the case independently and it cannot be said
that he is bound by that part of the two opinions
of the two Judges comprising the Division
Bench where there is no difference, As a matter
of fact the Third Judge is not bound by any such
opinion of the Division Bench. He is not hear-
ing the matter as if he is sitting in a three Judge
Bench where the opinion of majority would
prevail. We are thus of the opinion that Prasad,
J was not right in his approach and his hands
were not tied as far as the three appellants,
namely, Gajraj Singh, Meharban Singh and
Baboo Singh before him, were concerned in
respect of whom both Judges of the Division
Bench opined that they were guilty and their
conviction and sentences were to be upheld.”

550. Despite such observations, the Court did
not interfere with the opinion of the Third Judge on
the reasonings that “Since we have heard the matter
in respect of all the three appellants at length we do
not think it is desirable now at this stage to remand
the matter when only some of the appellants could
be said to have been’ prejudiced because of the
approach adopted by Prasad, J” .The Supreme Court
thereupon heard the appeal on merit and dismissed

the appeal, The cases of Dhan Singh and Sajjan
Singh have been decided in the light of the provision
of section 392 of the Code of 1973.

551. In the case of BN Ananta Padma Nabiah
(AIR 1971 SC 1836), 3 accused persons
charged under section 120B of the Penal Code
with sections S(II), 5(1)(c) and S(1)(d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act and sections 467 and
471 of the Penal Code in two cases, The accused
persons filed separate revision petitions in the High
Court challenging the jurisdiction mainly on the
points that the Special Judge of Gauhati has no juris-
diction to try the cases investigated by the Delhi
Special Police Establishment, that no consent of the
Government of Assam was taken, and that the inves-
tigation carried by the investigating agency under an
order of the Magistrate at Delhi was not in accor-
dance with section 196A of the Code. The Division
Bench of the High Court of Assam and Nagaland
unanimously rejected the first two contentions but
were divided in their opinions on the points as to
whether the Magistrate applied his mind to allow the
investigating agency to investigate the cases and
whether sanction under section 196A was necessary,
The matter was then laid before a Third Judge. The
Third Judge held that the Magistrate acted without
jurisdiction in allowing the investigating agency to
investigate into the matter and accordingly, he
quashed the proceedings. The question in dispute
was whether a new point as to the competency of the
Magistrate at Delhi to sanction investigation could
have been raised before the Third Judge since the
said point had not been raised before the Division
Bench AN Ray, J approved the views taken in 4/R
1970 SC 1266 wherein it was observed that “the
Third learned Judge could deal with the whole
case.” There is no dispute in the statement of law. It
is in the discretion of the Third to deal with the case
and in deciding the case if any point is found neces-
sary, he can decide the said point as well.

552. In Muhammad Shafi vs Crown, 6 DLR
(WP) 104 (Full Bench), Muhammad Shafi was s:
tenced to death under section 302 of the Penal Code.
The case came before a Bench of the Sindh High
Court Division by way of appeal and confirmation
The learned Judges having disagreed on the point
whether the provisions of section 342 of the Code


            
has been complied with and, if not, whether the trial
is vitiated. The matter was referred to a Full Bench
The Full Bench decided by majority that the provi-
sions of section 342 had not been complied with and
that the trial was not vitiated by reason of this defect
as it is curable. Since the matter was referred to a
Full Bench, on behalf of the State it was argued that
the case should be sent back to a Third Judge for
giving opinion under section 378 of the Code. In this
context of the matter the leamed Judges agreed with
the contention that “the Third Judge was exercising
the authority of a Bench of Judges and that, there-
fore, he should consider for the purposes of section
12 of the Sind Courts Act not as a single Judge, but
as a Bench”. This case has no manner of application
in this case,

553. In Akdur Raziq vs State 16 DLR (WP) 73,
it was observed “There is nowhere laid down in sec-
tions 378 and 429 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
that the Third Judge should follow or may follow the
opinion of the Judge who has given his opinion
favouring the accused.” There is no dispute in this
proposition that the Third Judge should lean towards
the Judge of the Division Bench favouring the
acquittal of the accused for, if this proposition is
accepted, there was no necessity in using the expres-
sions “such Judge, after such hearing as he thinks
fit, shall deliver his opinion, and the judgment or
order shall follow such opinion” in section 378 of
the Code.

554. From the above conspectus of the deci-
sions, we find that there are conflicting views in the
Supreme Court of India on the point as to the power
of the Third Judge to decide a case on which the
Judges of the Division Bench are equally divided in
opinion. It is worthy to note here that the learned
Counsels for the appellants have failed to satisfy us
that the Supreme Court of India overruled the views
taken in Babu (AIR 1965 SC 1467), which in my
opinion, holds the field on the point till now, The
said decision has been given by five member Judges
and the views taken therein have been followed in
later cases. There is of course a contrary opinion in
some cases constituting with two member Judges
Bench but while taking such view, the learned
Judges totally ignored the views taken by the five
member Constitution Bench. I find no cogent
ground to depart from those views as they are based
on correct construction of the provisions of law, 1
which, I respectfully agree. Even if it is assume
that the Third learned Judge ought to have heard the
reference in respect of all the convicts, the appellants could not be said to have been prejudiced
have heard the appeals of the appellants at length on
merit.

This opinion of the Third learned Judge is 
absolutely in accordance with sections 378 and 429
of the Code. This section contemplated that it was
for the Third Judge to decide on which points and in
respect of whom he should hear arguments. He is
completely free in resolving the difference as he
thinks fit. The Third learned Judge in exercise of
discretionary power declined to hear the cases of the
9 convicts in respect of whom there is no difference
of opinion as regards their conviction and sentence
and he did not consider it necessary to decide their
case, but if it was necessary to decide the case of 9
accused the Third learned Judge was in agreement
with the learned Judges of the Division Bench and
could have accepted the conviction in respect of
them. The operating portion of the opinion of the
Third learned Judge is regarded as the final judg-
ment of the High Court Division. Therefore, | repel
the objection raised by the learned Counsels for the
appellants.

555. Delay

The next point raised by the learned Counsels is
that there is inordinate delay in lodging the FIR and
this unreasonable delay of 21 years enabled the
prosecution to introduce concocted story of impli-
cating the appellants falsely by collecting manipu-
lated evidence which caused prejudice to the appel-
lants and that the High Court Division acted illegal-
ly in failing to consider this aspect of the matter. It
has further been contended that even if it is assumed
that this delay has been caused due to the promulga-
tion of the Indemnity Ordinance, 1975, there is no
explanation for about three months from 14th
November, 1996, the date of repeal of the Indemnity
(Repeal) Act, 1996 to the date of lodging the FIR on
2nd October, 1996.

556. Mr Anisul Hug, learned Counsel and the
learned Attorney-General, on the other hand, sub-

            
 mitted that the prosecution not only had explained
the reasons but also demonstrated cogent evidence
to substantiate the cause for delay in lodging the
FIR. According to them, the inability to lodge the
FIR after the occurrence was due to the fact that the
successive Governments expressly as well as
impliedly prevented to institute the case against the
accused persons by promulgating Indemnity
Ordinance, 1975; and that the accused persons under
the shelter of the then governments held influential
and powerful positions after the incident and from
their conducts the informant feeling insecurity of his
life did not lodge the FIR. It was contended that
Lieutenant Colonel Khondker Abdur Rashid along
with Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
floated a political party under the name “Freedom
Party” and Major Bazlul Huda was the Secretary of
the party; that after General Zia assumed power
rewarded most of the accused persons by appointing
them in Foreign Missions even after they declared
themselves as killers of the then President. It was
further contended that this being an exceptional case
in which the then successive Governments sheltered
and protected the accused persons, the informant
was apprehensive of his life by taking the risk of fil-
ing any case till the Bangladesh Awami League
came to power in 1996 and that as the President of
the said party did not take any step, he was com-
pelled to lodge the FIR. In this connection they have
referred the cases of State vs Fazal, 39 DLR (AD)
166, Md Shamsuddin @ Lambu vs State, 40 DLR
(AD) 69, Tara Singh and others vs State of Punjab
1991] Supp (1) SCC 536, Jamna vs State of UP 1994
Supp (1) SCC 185 and State of HP vs Shreekanta
Shekari (2004) 8 SCC 153.

557. There is no denial of the fact that this
case has been instituted after 21 years of the date of
incident. There is an explanation about the delay and
the learned Judges have believed the explanation
and observed that the prosecution has been able to
explain the delay by assigning cogent reason. In this
regard the first learned Judge observed as follows:

“In the present case delay in lodging the
FIR has sufficiently been explained and in view
of the matter, the contention that FIR has been
lodged after lapse of several years so charge of
manipulation and false implication can all

together to be not ruled out merits no consider-

ation.”

558. The second learned Judge, on the other
hand, on consideration of the evidence of P

and other witnesses observed as follows :

“the most accused persons used to stay in
Bangabhaban since 15th August, 1975 and in
the name of an unwritten command council
used to govern the country till they were made
to leave on the 4th November, 1975. Still
.though they were not without influence. The
accused Major Syed Faruque Rahman tried to
force a mutiny at Savar and Bogra Cantonments
and the accused Major Khondker Abdur Rashid
tried unsuccessfully to take over the command
of 2nd Field Artillery Regiment in 1976. Again
in 1980 they made another attempt to overthrow
the Government but still no Government took
any punitive action against any of them; rather
they were all given their arrear salaries. The
accused Major Syed Faruque Rahman even
contested the Presidential election in 1986 (PW
44). So the apprehension of the informant about
his life and limb cannot be said to be unreason-
able. Under such circumstances, the delay in
lodging the FIR cannot vitiate the trial, after all
it is always for the prosecution to prove its case
on evidence,-as such, and the contention of the
learned Counsel on behalf of the appellants
about the delay in lodging the FIR has got no
substance.”

559. It seems to me, the learned Judges on
assigning reasons have believed the explanation of
delay as reasonable. This being a finding of fact
based on evidence on record cannot be interfered
with by this Court in the absence of any mistake in
the reading of the evidence or by ignoring material
evidence on the point argued. It is true that a first
information report in a criminal case is an extreme-
ly vital and valuable piece of evidence for the pur-
pose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced at
the trial. The importance of the first information
report can be looked into from the standpoint of the
accused, Delay in lodging this report. sometimes
resulting in embellishment by creature of after-
thought. On account of delay not only the report gets
bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, danger creeps

            
on the introduction of coloured version, exonerated
account, concocted story as a result of consultation,
Even a long delay can be condoned if the witnesses
have no motive for implicating the accused,

560. The principle of law on the point of delay
is not disputed one, The consistent views of the
Superior Courts are that mere delay in lodging a
case is not a ground for disbelieving a prosecution
case, for there are various circumstances in which
lodging any case as to the commission of offence
may be delayed. It was observed in Shreekanta
Shekari (supra):

“Delay in lodging the first information
report cannot be used as a ritualistic formula for
discarding the prosecution case and doubting its
authenticity. It only puts the Court on guard to
search for and consider if any explanation has
been offered for the delay. Once it is offered,
the Court is to only see whether it is satisfacto-
ry or not. In case if the prosecution fails to sat-
isfactorily explain the delay and there is possi-
bility of embellishment of exaggeration in the
prosecution version on account of such delay, it
is a relevant factor. On the other hand, satisfac-
tory explanation of the delay is weighty enough
to reject the plea of false implication or vulner-
ability of the prosecution case.”

561. In Ramjag vs State of UP, AIR 1974 SC
606; it has been observed as follows:

“It is true that witnesses cannot be called
upon to explain every hours delay and a com-
monsense view has to be taken in ascertaining
whether the first information report was lodged
after undue delay so as to afford enough scope
for manipulating evidence. Whether the delay is
so long as to through a cloud of suspicion on the
seeds of the prosecution must depend upon a
variety of factors which would vary from case
to case. Even a long delay in filing report of an
occurrence can be condoned if the witnesses on
whose evidence the prosecution relies have no
motive for implicating the accused.”

562. The informant has implicated only 14
accused persons in the FIR of them, he made specif-
ic allegation of overt act against the appellant Major
Bazlul Huda and identified 3 other accused persons

including appellant Lieutenant Colonel Farugue
Rahman, and implicated rest of the accused Persons
from the information collected from other sources,
If he had ill motive to implicate and/or embellis
facts against the accused persons, he could haye
vividly mentioned therein the role played by each
accused person, but he did not resort to that path;
This facts show that this FIR is not tainted by embe|.
lishment or a creature of after thought, rather it is the
true version what the informant has seen at the pla:
of occurrence. What ever incriminating evidence
that have been collected against the appellants and
other accused persons regarding their complicity jn
the occurrence are by the investigating agency jn
course of the investigation of the case.

563. There is another factor which should not
be ignored in considering the delay in lodging
FIR. After the incident Khondker Mustaque Ahmed
usurped the power and proclaimed Martial Law on
20th August, 1975 and assumed the office of the
President of Bangladesh with retrospective effect
from 15th August, 1975. Thereafter he promulgated
the Indemnity Ordinance, 1975 on 26th September,
1975. This Ordinance was promulgated putting
restriction on taking of any legal or other proceed-
ings against persons in respect of certain acts;
things, committed by those persons in connection
with, or in preparation or execution of any plan for,
or necessary steps towards the change of the
Government of Bangladesh and the Proclamation of
Martial Law of 15th August, 1975. Whether or not
an FIR could have been lodged even after the prom-
ulgation of the said Ordinance was a matter of inter-
pretation of law but one would think for the second
time to file any case on the face of promulgation of
such Ordinance giving protection to the accused
from the State level. It has got psychological impact,
which is evidenced from the testimony of Colenel
Shafayat Jamil (PW 44). He stated that the conspit-
ators of 15th August and the killer officers Major
Faruque Rahman and Rashid always stayed in the
Bangabhaban; their accomplice officers stayed in
the Radio Station and used to maintain contac!
among them by constituting an unwritten Revo-
lutionary Command Council and ruled the country
under the leadership of Knondker Mustaque Ahmed,
He further stated that it was not possible for taking
legal action against the killers of 15th August as the


            
killers were being given protection by the
Governments in power after the incident till 1996,
This statement cannot be said to be exaggerated,
Admittedly, the then President and all other mem-
bers of his family found in the house were brutally
killed. It was a bounden duty for Governments in
power to institute a case for ascertaining the cause
for the death if they had not supported the perpetra-
tors and brought them to justice but in this particu-
lar case, the process of law was not allowed to take
its own course, rather by promulgating Indemnity
Ordinance, they wanted to protect the perpetrators.
Initially they reinstated the removed army officers
and then absorbed almost all of them in the Foreign
Ministry and appointed them in the Foreign
Missions. The successive Governments in power not
only exposed themselves that they had tacit support
to the camage but also showed blatant disrespect to
the ule of law.

564. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
was not only the President of the country, he is the
Father of the Nation but the people of the country
waited 21 years for instituting a case against the per-
petrators because the governments in power during
that period gave protection to the perpetrators. This
fact justified the explanation given by the informant
that for fear of reprisal he did not to institute a case.
Under the Constitution the President and the Prime
Minister take oath on the following, amongst other
terms:

“That I will preserve, protect, and defend
the Constitution and that I will do right to all
manner of people according to law, without fear
and favour, affection or ill-will.”

565. Every word and expression in the oath of
a President or Prime Minister is potent with a mes-
sage. The message has to be demystified by reading
between the lines and looking beyond what meets
the eyes. The Chief Executive of the state must bear
faith and allegiance to the Constitution. It demands
not only belief in constitutional principles but a loy-
alty and devotion akin to complete surrender to the
constitutional beliefs. This solemn affirmation was
ignored by them whenever they were required to
take legal actions against the perpetrators of the then
President of the country. They were duty bound
under the oath to protect and defend the Constitution

and to perform their responsibilities “according to
law”, But those Governments utterly failed to per-
form their responsibilities ‘according to law.’ An
offence of murder is a cognizable offence and for
such offence the officer-in-charge of a local Police
Station is under an obligation to lodge an FIR and to
hold investigation into the offence without an order
of a Magistrate and to submit his report under sec-
tion 173 of the Code. Even in cases of suicide or
suspected killing of any person, if the officer-in-
charge of a police station has received an informa-
tion shall immediately give an intimation thereof to
the nearest Magistrate empowered to hold inquest
and unless otherwise directed by the Government
shall proceed to the place where the body of the
deceased was found, in presence of two or more
responsible inhabitants of the neighbourhood and
shall make an investigation, and draw up a report of
the apparent cause of death as per provisions of sec-
tion 174 of the Code. It is also the duty of the police
officer to submit the inquest report forthwith to the
Magistrate. In this case these procedures have been
totally ignored by the police officer, which speaks
volume about the motive of the then Government. If
no case was instituted against the killers of the elect-
ed President of the country by anyone on his behalf,
the Government was under obligation to institute a
case, and as they failed to perform the constitution-
al responsibility, they had certainly violated their
oaths that they affirmed. Secondly, the conducts of
the succeeding governments in not allowing the law
to take its own course even after killing of the elect-
ed President of the country along with family mem-
bers proved that they had no respect to the rule of
law, The assailants of the then President not only
committed an offence of murder, they had commit-
ted crime against humanity by killing a child and
three innocent women,

566. Learned Attorney-General and Mr
Ajmalul Hossain vehemently criticised the conduct
of the Governments in power. Mr Hossain contends
that the justice delivery system has failed in all
respects during the relevant time which cannot be
exonerated. This failure of the justice delivery sys
tem has colossal and catastrophic affect in the coun-
try which should not be allowed to recur for the
interest of the people. This, according to him, is a
part of history that cannot be erased the entire


            
administration from the top to the bottom failed to
perform their responsibilities, and this will be
termed as a scandalous chapter in our history, and
this sort of practice should be stopped forever—it
should not be allowed to repeat again. 1 fully agree
with the views of the learned Counsel. Whenever a
criminal offence is committed, then irrespective of
whether it also involves a civil injury, the offender
becomes liable to punishment by the state, not for
the purpose of affording compensation or restitution
of anyone who may have been injured but as a
penalty for the offence and in order to deter the com-
mission of similar offences and, in some cases, for
the reform of the offender. Here the matter is one of
public law, proceedings against the offenders may
be instituted by the State without the consent of any
person who has been injured.

567. While endorsing the above arguments,
MrTawfique Nawaz, learned State Counsel submits
that there is an onerous duty upon this Court to
address the Constitutional issues arising in these
appeals and not to make them by reference to mere-
ly to statutory laws, competing statutory laws or
precedents of foreign jurisdictions, in disregard of ,
or without adequately considering the provisions of
the Constitution, especially, since the victim of the
murder is also a person created under the Cons titu-
tion as President and the Father of the Nation.

568. What is justice? How is justice related to
law? According to Lucas (1980: 3), justice “differs
from benevolence, generosity, gratitude, friendship,
and compassion”. It is not something for which we
should feel grateful, but rather, something upon
which we have a right to insist. According to Plato,
Justice consists of maintaining the societal status
quo. Justice is one of four civic virtues, the others
being wisdom, temperance, and courage. In an
ordered state, everyone performs his or her role and,
does not interfere with others. Each person’s role is
the one for which the individual is best fitted by
nature; thus, natural law is upheld. Aristotle
believed that Justice exists in the law and that the
Jaw is “the unwritten custom of all or the majority of
men which draws a distinction between what is hon-
ourable and what is base”. The concept of impartial-
ity is at the core of our system of criminal justice.

569. A Government not of men but of laws’ is
how the American founding fathers envisaged their
new state. The earliest official document in which
the phrase appears, in the form a Government of
laws and not of men. A system of Government in
which executive, legislature and judiciary are each,
in separate hands with each essentially limited to its
own sphere of activity was regarded by the
American founding fathers as the best safeguard of
liberty. When law ends tyranny begins. These words
emblazoned over the Justice Department Building in
Washington DC. The underlying assumption in both
is that law is the very antithesis of arbitrary power,
The United States was self-consciously modeled in
opposition to the absolute monarchies of eighteenth.
century Europe. The tyranny of an autocratic ruler
was what particularly exercised the minds of the
framers of the American Constitution.

570. When Bangladesh attained her independence, our founding fathers wanted to establish a
democratic welfare state, which would allow equal
opportunity to one and all, irrespective of caste,
colour, sex and any other form of discrimination. We
adopted democracy as the form of Government
since this is the best and most acceptable form
evolved through centuries of experience among the
people who are concerned about the dignity, rights,
and person of human race. The chapter of
Fundamental Rights was designed to ensure not
only freedom and liberty but also equality, and most
important, equal opportunity. In order to ensure that
the democratic set-up that we had adopted did not
convert itself into an anarchic state, the Constituent
Assembly framed the Constitution with certain basic
concepts, most important of which is the concept of
tule of law.

The rule of law depends upon definite princi-
ples and binding precedent, which together make for
certainty, uniformity, and predictability, which in
tum provide the foundation of fairness and justice.
The term ‘rule of law’ is closely associated with the
name of Albert Venn Dicey, whose introduction to
the study of the Law of the Constitution, is probably
the best known and most influential book on the
British Constitution ever written. The rule of law is
defined by Dicey as comprising at least three di
tinct though kindred conceptions, in the following
terms:


            
“(1) We mean, in the first place, that no
man is punishable or can be lawfully made to
suffer in body or goods except for a distinct
breach of law established in the ordinary legal
manner before the ordinary Courts of the land.
In this sense the rule of law is contrasted with
every system of government based on the exer-
cise by persons in authority of wide, arbitrary,
or discretionary powers of constraint.

“(2) We mean in the second place, when we
speak of the ‘rule of law’ as a characteristic of
our country, not only that with us no man is
above the law, but (what is a different thing)
that here every man, whatever be his rank or
condition, is subject to the ordinary law of the
realm and amenable to the jurisdiction of the
ordinary tribunals.”

“(3) There remains yet a Third and a differ-
ent sense in which the ‘rule of law’ or the pre-
dominance of the legal spirit may be described
as a special attribute of English institutions. We
may say that the Constitution is pervaded by the
rule of law on the ground that the general prin-
ciples of the Constitution (as for example the
right to personal liberty, or the right of public
meeting) are with us as the result of judicial
decisions determining the rights of private per-
sons in particular cases brought before the
Courts; whereas under many foreign constitu-
tions the security (such as it is) given to the
rights of individuals results, or appears to result,
from the general principles of the Constitution.”

571. The preamble of our Constitution states
‘tule of law’ is one of the objectives to be attained.
Mahmudul Islam in his ‘Constitutional Law of
Bangladesh, second Edition, in paragraph 1.84
argued “The rule of law is a basic feature of the
Constitution of Bangladesh. What the meaning of
‘rule of law’ is as envisaged in the Constitution? It
can be seen from the preamble that fundamental
human rights and freedom, equality and justice,
Political, economic and social have been mentioned
after ‘rule of law’ as if these concepts are not includ-
ed in ‘rule of law’. From this one may argue that
“rule of Jaw’ as contemplated in the Constitution
Concerns the certainty and publicity of law and its
uniform enforceability and has no reference to the

quality of the law; the Constitution deals with sub-
stantive justice separately from ‘rule of law’, This
argument is merely academic. As there is difference
of opinion as to the actual meaning of ‘rule of law’,
the framers of the Constitution, after mentioning
‘rule of law’ in the preamble, took care to mention
the other concepts touching on the qualitative
aspects of ‘law’, thereby showing their adherence to
the concept of rule of law as propounded by the lat-
ter viewers. If the relevant paragraph of the pream-
ble is read as a whole in its proper context, there
remains no doubt that the framers of the
Constitution intended to achieve ‘rule of law’ as
advocated by the latter viewers. To attain this fun-
damental aim of the State, the Constitution has made
substantive provisions for the establishment of a
polity where every functionary of the State must jus-
tify his action with reference to law.”

572. Among different types of felonies, an
offence of murder or an order to commit murder is
obviously illegal and immoral. Murder, rape and tor-
ture were as unlawful in Germany even under the
Nazis as anywhere else. That is why the Nazis never
tried to legalise genocide; the orders to kill the con-
centration camp inmates were always couched in
veiled terms. For even the Nazis recognised that
such conduct could never be justified in terms of
any system of law. Not only we ignored the concept
of ‘rule of law’ argued by Dicey as back as in 1885,
but also tried to legalise a crime against humanity
and rewarded the perpetrators of that crime in the
manner the Nazi’s regime turned a blind eye to the
perpetrators of such crime. This would be marked as
a dark chapter in the history of this nation. The con-
cept of rule of law is recognised all over the world,
and our founding fathers of the Constitution also
adopted that principle, but, we failed to apply the
same in the case of the killing of our Father of the
Nation.

573, The basic elements of a criminal justice
system are an impartial fact-finding process and a
fair and equitable resolution. The ethical and moral
duties of those who work within the system are typ-
ically consistent with the concept of justice. The
criminal justice system in a country is designed to
protect the citizens of the country from the
onslaught of criminal activities of a section of peo-


            
 people who indulges in such acts, The State as a
guardian of fundamental rights of its citizens is duty
bound to ensure the administration of justice and the
rule of law, It is in the interest of the people that the
guilt of the offender who has indulged in criminal
activity is determined as quickly as possible. But,
unfortunately, this concept has been ignored in case
of the carnage of the then President and his family
members. In order to have a strong socio-economic
system, it is important that each and every offender
involved in crime should be put to justice and his
trial should move at reasonably fast pace. The chal-
lenges before the criminal justice system are to bal-
ance the rights of the citizen as well as of the
accused while dispensing speedy and effective jus-
tice in order to ensure a welfare state for its citizens.
Rule of law is meaningless unless there is access to
justice for the common people.

574. Plea of Mutiny

It was argued that the evidence on record
revealed that the killing and the change of power on
15th August, 1975 was a result of mutiny by some
army officers and therefore, the trial of the appel-
lants under the provisions of the Code was without
jurisdiction. According to the learned Counsels, the
trial ought to have been held by a Court Martial
under the provisions of Army Act, 1952. In this con-
nection, learned Counsels have referred to sections
31(a), 59(3), 92(2), 94 and 95 of the Army Act, sec-
tions 5 and 139 of the Penal Code and section 594(2)
of the Code.

575. Mr Khan Saifur Rahman argued that
without determination as to whether the alleged
incident was a mutiny leading to the murder of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his fam-
ily members, the conviction of the appellants by a
normal criminal Court is without jurisdiction.
Learned Counsel further argued that the instant inci-
dent was originated from the Dhaka Cantonment on
the night of 14th August from which it was apparent
that it was a mutiny simpliciter, not a murder and
therefore, the trial of the appellants was vitiated.
There was no agreement or criminal conspiracy or
premeditated plan or pre-arranged plan, the learned
Counsel argued, within the meaning of section 34 or
section 120A of the Penal Code and therefore, the
conviction of the appellants under the provisions of
the Penal Code was illegal. Learned Counsel further
argued that when any retired army officer or any
other person not subject to Army Act joined in 1}.
occurrence on the night following 14th Aug
1975 would also constitute a mutiny within 4
ambit of section 31 of the Army Act and they ought
to have been tried by a Court Martial under the
Army Act. The learned Counsel finally argued thy
there is similarity in the killing of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and General Ziaur Rahman
and in both the cases they were Presidents of the
Republic, and they were killed by the army personnel. In case of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, the army from artillery and lancer units
came out from Dhaka Cantonment and killed him at
dawn on 15th August, 1975 at his official residence,
whereas, in case of General Ziaur Rahman the army
came out from Chittagong Cantonment and killed
him at Circuit House where he was staying on the
night following 29th May, 1981. Since both the
occurrences committed in the similar manner, the
appellants, if they were at all involved in the inci-
dent of 15th August, ought to have been tried by a
Court Martial to be convened by the Chief of Amy
Staff as was done in case of General Ziaur Rahman’s
killing. In this connection the learned Counsel has
referred to the case of Jamil Hug vs Bangladesh, 34
DLR (AD) 125. ,

576. Mr Anisul Huq and the learned Attorney-
General, on the other hand, contend that the incident
is not a mutiny, rather it is a preplanned murder, and
therefore, there is no legal bar for the trial of the
appellants under the provisions of the Code. In this
connection, they have referred sections 59, 92, 94
and 95 of the Army Act, section 35 of the Navy
Ordinance 1961 and section 549 of the Code.
Learned Attorney-General added that the appellants
did not raise this point in the trial Court and raised it
in the High Court Division with malafide motive to
delay the disposal of the matter. According to the
learned Attorney-General, the evidence on record do
not support a case of mutiny, rather they disclose a
case of murder. Learned Attorney-General finally
contends even if it is assumed that the incident is
‘civil offence’ within the meaning of section 8(2)
read with section 59(2) of the Army Act, in view of
section 94 of the Army Act, the criminal Court has
concurrent jurisdiction to try such offence.


            
 577. Before I meet the contentions of the
learned Counsels, 1 would like to mention some
admitted facts in this case, | noticed that the defence
did not take any plea of mutiny at the trial by cross-
examining or giving suggestions to the prosecution
es or in their written statements in reply to
aminations under section 342 of the Code or
by adducing evidence in accordance with section
340 (3) of the Code. Since the prosecution witness-
es did not say anything in support of the plea of
mutiny, the defence ought to have made out a case at
least by way of suggestion to the witnesses that the
amy officers involved in the mutiny submitted their
charter of demands to the authority in the armed
forces and that as their demands were not redressed,
they revolted. Secondly, if there was rebellion as
claimed the rebellious force would have attacked
their commanding officer, and if the commanding
officer was involved, they would have attacked the
Chief of Army Staff but they did not attack them,
rather killed the President which proved that it was
not 2 mutiny.

578. It was suggested to Md Aminur Rahman
(PW 24) on behalf of Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman that at that time (when Major
Dalim was broadcasting the news of the killing) he
(PW 24) had knowledge about declaration of
Martial Law that Khondker Mustaque became the
Chief Martial Law Administrator. From this sugges-
tion the defence wanted to make out a case that there
was successful coup d’etat by Khondker Mustaque
Ahmed in which the President was killed. This
defence plea supports the prosecution case that
Khandaker Mustaque and some aborted army offi-
cers brutally killed the President and usurped power.
There was provision for removal of the President in
the Constitution but the President was not removed
in accordance with the said provision, As per
Constitution, the Vice-President ought to have
assumed the office of President if the vacancy
occurred in the office of President or if the President
was unable to discharge the functions of his office
on any of the grounds mentioned in the Constitution
but this time the constitutional provisions were
ignored. If there was failure of the army insurrec-
tion, the mutinous force should have been brought to
justice for mutiny under the Army Act but no such
action was taken. On the contrary, it is seen that the

perpetrators of the crime were rewarded by the
Government and the authority in the armed forces
Supported their action by expressing allegiance in
favour of the change. Md Reajul Haque (PW 37)
stated in chief that at about 9-00 AM the Chiefs of
three Services, the BDR chief, the IG of Police were
brought by Major Dalim at Studio No.2 and their
statements of allegiance in favour of the change
were recorded and broadcast. On behalf of
Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid it was suggest-
ed to Major General Shafiullah (PW 45) that there
was successful military coup in the morning of 15th
August, 1975, that in pursuance of such revolt
Khondker Mustaque Ahmed became the President
of the country, that all the chiefs of the defence serv-
ices expressed their allegiance in favour of the
change and that he could not take any action against
the persons involved in the incident. He stated that
Khandaker Mustaque declared the killers as descen-
dants of King Surya of the Surya Dynasty. In reply
to a question on behalf of Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, Colonel (Retd) Shafayet Jamil
(PW 44) stated that it was not possible to take any
action against the killers of 15th August, that the
persons involved in the killing of 15th August were
given protection by the subsequent Governments till
1996, that the conspirators and killers of 15th
August used to stay at Bangabhaban and that they
run the Mustaque Government by constituting a rev-
olutionary council.

579. From the above suggestions given to the
witnesses, it appeared that the. accused persons
though termed the incident as the change of power
by killing the President but the succeeding Govern-
ments acknowledged their act of killing as legal one
and rewarded them by declaring them as ‘Surya
Santan’ and absorbing them in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs. They did not try to make out a case
of mutiny rather they tried to justify their action as
one of successful coup d’etat. They set up a new
plea of defence just reverse to what they took at the
trial stage in the High Court Division although there
is no material in support of the plea. Let us now con-
sider the legal aspects of the point urged by the
learned Counsels. In the Army Act, 1952, the defini-
tion of mutiny has not been given but the punish-
ment for the mutiny has been provided in section 31.
Mutiny has been defined in section 35 of the Navy

            
Ordinance, 1961, which reads thus:

“35. In this Ordinance, mutiny means a
combination between two or more persons sub-
ject to service law, or between persons two at
least of whom are subject to service law—

(d) to overthrow or resist lawful authority
in the armed forces of Bangladesh or any forces
co-operating therewith or in any part of any of
the said forces;

(e) to disobey such authority in such cir-
cumstances as to make the disobedience sub-
versive of discipline, or with the object of
avoiding any duty or service, or in connection
with operations against the enemy; or

(f) to impede the performance of any duty
or service in the armed forces of Bangladesh or
in any forces co-operating therewith, or in any
part of any of the said forces.”

580. There is no dispute that this definition of

mutiny is applicable to the Army Act in view of the
definition of ‘service law’ defined in section
4(xxxiv) in the Navy Ordinance, which provides
that “service law” means “this Ordinance, the Army
Act, 1952 , the Air Force Act, 1953, and the rules
and regulations made there under.” Mr Khan Saifur
Rahman submits that the expression ‘active service’
used in section 59 of the Army Act is not applicable
in this case but he fails to explain why this expres-
sion will not be applicable to the appellants. This is
apparently a contradictory submission, inasmuch as
the appellants are challenging the jurisdiction of the
criminal Court relying upon some provisions of the
Amny Act, but at the same time, they want to ignore
a vital provision in the said Act. Mr Huq submits
that this definition of mutiny should be read along
with section 31 of the Army Act for arriving at a cor-
rect conclusion that the acts of the appellants do not
come within the mischief of mutiny.

581. Clause (a) of section 31 of the Army Act
relates to the substantive offence of mutiny and
insubordination, while other three sub-clauses
(b),(c) and (d) relate to the abetment of the offence
of mutiny. In order to bring an offence of mutiny
within the ambit of the Act, there must be evidence
of overthrowing or resisting lawful authority of the

armed forces or disobeying the authority in such Cir.
cumstances as to make the disobedience Subversive
of discipline or to impede the performance of ap,

duty or service in the armed forces of Bangladesh,
There is nothing on record to show that the appey.
lants and other accused have collectively insuborq),
nated or defied or disregarded the authority in the
armed forces or refused to obey authority in order to
bring their act within the ambit of mutiny or aber.
ment for mutiny. The evidence on record proved thar
the accused persons instead of resisting the lawfy)
authority of the armed forces or acting subversive 1,
the discipline or insubordination, usurped the power
by killing the President, and set up their accomplice
in the office of President which act does cover the
offence of mutiny. A person will not be made subjecy
to penalties unless the offence charged is strictly
brought within the purview of the statute. .

582. Section 59(1) provides that subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), any person subject to
the Army Act commits a civil offence at any place
shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence under the
said Act. “Civil offence’ defined in section 8(2)
Army Act means “an offence which, if committed in
Bangladesh would be triable by a Criminal Coun”,
Section 59(2) of the Army Act stipulates that a per-
son who is subject to the Army Act commits murder
and other offences mentioned therein against any
person not subject to the said Act shall not be liable
to prosecution under the said Act unless he commits
the offence while on ‘active service’. The term
‘active service’ has been defined in section 8(1) as
under:

“active service”, as applied to a person sub-
ject to this Act, means the time during which
such person is attached to, or forms part of a
force which is engaged in operations against an
enemy, or is engaged in military operations in,
or is on the line of march to, a country or place
wholly or partly occupied by an enemy, or is
attached to or forms part of a force which is in
military occupation of a foreign country;

583. The killing of the then President and the
members of his family was not committed by the
accused persons while they were engaged in operations against enemy, or in military operations in of are on the line of march to a country wholly or partly

            
 occupied by the enemy in order to bring the
offence within the ambit of ‘active service’. In view
of the above, the learned Counsel frankly conceded
that the appellants were not on active service at the
time of occurrence. If the appellants while on ‘active
service’ committed a ‘civil offence’ they would be
deemed to be guilty against the Army Act, but on the
contrary, while committing the offence they were
not 0 active service both the Court Martial and the
ordinary criminal Court would have concurrent
jurisdiction subject to the conditions provided in
section 92 of the Army Act. Section 92 provides that
where an offence has been committed by any person
while subject to the Army Act, and he has ceased to
be so subject, he may be tried for such offence if his
trial commences within six months after he had
ceased to be so subject. A combined reading of sec-
tions 8(1), 8(2), 59 and 92 suggest that if a person
subject to the Army Act commits any civil offence
of murder against a person: not subject to the said
Act, while on active service, he may be tried by a
Court Martial under the Army Act if such trial com-
mences Within six months after he had ceased to be
so subject. The limitation of six months after the
appellants’ cessation of the subject of the Army Act
expired long before the trial of the case commenced.
Even if the limitation for such trial had not been
expired, their trial by the criminal Court had not
been ousted since the ordinary criminal Court had
concurrent jurisdiction to try ‘civil offence’ as per
provisions of sections 94 and 95 of the said Act.

584. For trial of civil offence by an ordinary
criminal Court Sections 94 and 95 have been includ-
ed in Chapter IX of the Army Act. Section 94 pre-
supposes that both a criminal Court and Court
Martial have jurisdiction concurrently in respect of
an act or omission punishable both under the Army
Act as well as under any law in force. It may also
arise in case of an offence deemed to be an offence
under the Army Act. Under the scheme of those two
provisions, in the first instance, it is left to the dis-
cretion of the prescribed officer to decide before
Which Court the proceedings shall be instituted and,
if the officer decides that the case should be institut-
ed before a Court Martial, the offender is to be
detained in military custody. However, if'a criminal
Court is of opinion that the said offence shall be
tried before the said Court, he may issue notice

section 95 either to deliver over the offender
to the nearest Magistrate or to postpone the pro-
ceedings pending a reference to the Government.
Upon receipt of the requisition the prescribed officer
may cither deliver over the offender to the said
Court or refer the question to the Government for
determination as to whose order shall be final.

585, The next question, is whether in view of
section 139 of the Penal Code and section 549 of the
Code, the trial of the appellants by a criminal Court
is barred. Section 139 of the Penal Code is included
in Chapter VII which contains sections 131-140.
Section 131 provides for abetting mutiny or attempt-
ing to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his
duty, section 132 provides for abetment of mutiny, if
mutiny is committed in consequence thereof, and
other sections are relating to abetment of other
offences. Section 139 prohibits punishment of any
person who is subject to the Army Act, 1952, the
Navy Ordinance, 1961, the Air Force Act, 1953
under the provisions of Penal Code for any of the
offences mentioned above, i.e. for the abetment of
those offences mentioned in sections 131 to 138.
Thus section 139 of the Penal Code has no appli
tion in this case in view of the fact that the appel-
lants have been tried and convicted not for commit-
ting an offence of abetment for mutiny but for a sub-
stantive offence of murder. Section 549 of the Code
is of a special nature and has the result of taking
away the jurisdiction of criminal Court with respect
to persons subject to military, naval and air force
law. The expressions “is liable, to be tried either by
a Court to which the Code applies or by a Court-
Martial” used in the section implies that the offence
for which the offender is to be tried should be an
offence of which cognizance can be taken by a
Criminal Court as well as a Court Ma * The
phrase is intended to refer to the initial jurisdiction of
the two Courts to take cognizance of the offence and
not to their jurisdiction to decide it on merits. In
respect of offences which could be tried by both the
Criminal Court as well as a Court Martial, sections
94 and 95 of the Army Act have made suitable provi-
sions to avoid a conflict of jurisdiction between those
two Courts over which I have discussed above.

586. In Joginder Singh vs State of Himachal
Pradesh, AIR 1971 SC 500, the appellant Joginder

            
Singh was convicted under section 376 of the Penal
Code by the learned Assistant Sessions Judge while
on active service and governed by the Army Act,
1950 (India), He challenged the legality of his trial
and conviction on the ground that the provisions of
the Army Act read with Criminal Court and Court
Martial Rules, 1952 framed by the Government
under section $49 of the Code were not complied
with by the trial Court, It may be mentioned here
that sections 125 and 126 of the Army Act 1950
applicable to India and sections 94 and 95 of the
Army Act 1952 are in verbatim language. His con-
viction was upheld by the appellate Court and his
objection was over ruled by the Supreme Court on
the following observations:

“It is further clear that in respect of an
offence which could be tried both by a criminal
Court as well as a Court-Martial, sections 125,
126 and the Rules have made suitable provi-
sions to avoid a conflict of jurisdiction between
the ordinary criminal Courts and the Court
Martial. But it is to be noted that in the first
instance, discretion is left to the officer men-
tioned in section 125 to decide before which
Court the proceedings should be instituted.
Hence the officer commanding the army, army
corps, division, or independent brigade in
which the accused person is serving or such
other officer as may be prescribed will have to
exercise his discretion and decide under section
125 in which Court the proceedings shall be
instituted. It is only when he so exercises his
discretion and decides that the proceeding
should be instituted before a Court Martial, that
the provisions of section 126(1) come into oper-
ation. If the designated officer does not exercise
his discretion and decide that the proceedings
should be instituted before a Court-Martial, the
Army Act would not obviously be in the way of
a criminal Court exercising its ordinary juris-
diction in the manner provided by law.”

587. In Balbir Singh vs State of Punjab (1995)
J SCC 90, similar views have been expressed as
under:

“When a criminal Court and Court Martial
each have jurisdiction in respect of the trial of
the offence, it shall be in the discretion of the

officer commanding the group, wing or Station
in which the accused is serving or such other
officer as may be prescribed, in the firs,
instance, to decide before which Court the Proceedings shall be instituted and if that Officer
decides that they should be instituted before
“Court Martial”, to direct that the accused per.
sons shall be detained in Air Force Custody,
Thus, the option to try a person subject to the
Air Force Act who commits an offence while op
“active service” is in the first instance with the
Air Force Authorities. The criminal Court,
when such an accused is brought before it shall
not proceed to try such a person or to inquire
with a view to his commitment for trial ang
shall give a notice to the Commanding Officer
of the accused, to decide whether they would
like to try the accused by a Court Martial or
allow the criminal Court to proceed with the
trial. In case, the Air Force Authorities decide
either not to try such a person by a Count
Martial or fail to exercise the option when inti-
mated by a criminal Court within the period
prescribed by Rule 4 of the 1952 Rules, the
accused can be tried by the ordinary criminal
Court in accordance with the Code of Criminal
Procedure.”

588. In Major EG Barsay vs State of Bombay,
AIR 1961 SC 1762 Major EG Barsay while on active
service along with 5 other civilians conspired and
dishonestly misappropriated military stores, and by
abuse of their power by illegal means as public ser-
vants conspired to obtain military stores and com-
mitted theft. All of them were charged with the
offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 and sections 381, 411 read with section 34 of
the Penal Code. The Special Judge found Major EG
Barsay guilty of the charges and sentenced him. He
unsuccessfully moved an appeal before the Bombay
High Court and then in the Supreme Court of India.
He challenged the jurisdiction of the Special Judge
to try him and also raised other points. It was
observed by Subba Rao, J as follows:

“The scheme of the Act therefore is sell
evident. It applies to offences committed by
army personnel described in section 2 of the
Act; it creates new offences with specified pus

            
punishments, imposes higher punishments to pre-
existing offences, and enables civil offences by
a fiction to be treated as offence under the Act;
it provides satisfactory machinery for resolving
the conflict of jurisdiction, Further it enables,
subject to certain conditions an accused to be
tried successively both by Court Martial and by
a criminal Court, It does not expressly bar the
jurisdiction of criminal Courts in respect of acts
‘or omission punishable under the Act, if they
are also punishable under any other law in force
in India; nor is it possible to infer any prohibi-
tion by necessary implication. Sections 125,
126 and 127 exclude any such inference, for
they in express terms provide not only for
resolving conflict of jurisdiction between a
criminal Court and a Court Martial in respect of
a same offence, but also provide for successive
trials of an accused in respect of the same
offence.”

589. In the case of Jamil Huq, the writ peti-
tioners were tried and convicted by the Court
Martial under the Army Act, 1952 for the offence of
mutiny that took place in the night following 29th
March, 1981 which resulted in the death of Ziaur
(Rahman, then President of Bangladesh. They filed
\writ petitions challenging the decision of the Court
‘Martial constituted under the Army Act. The High
Court Division summarily rejected the writ petitions
‘on the ground of lack of jurisdiction. The Appellate
Division in the facts of the given case observed “if
the Court Martial is constituted properly and the
offence committed is cognizable by it then the rest is
a question of fact based on evidence which is held
by all the authorities that the writ jurisdiction is not
available to interfere. This Court is only concemed
to examine the question whether the jurisdiction
under Article 102 has been conferred and once it
comes to the conclusion that the jurisdiction has not
been conferred that is the end of the matter.” This
case has no manner of application in the facts of this
case,

590, On behalf of the appellants the learned
Counsels have also referred the case of R vs Grant,
Davis Riley and Topley, (1957) 2 All ER 694. In that
Teported case, the appellants were convicted by a
General Court Martial held at Nicosia in Cyprus of

the offences of mutiny. On the night of the incident
a noisy outbreak took place in the barracks the
appellants held a meeting on the roof of the hot
which they were stationed and then came down and 
in riotous conduct demolished the barracks’ shop as
their grievances made to the authority were not
redressed.

591. They received an order from a Warrant
Officer to disperse but they did not disperse. The
House of Lords refused to interfere with their con-
viction on the reasonings as under:

“I have not thought it necessary to take up
time by going through the evidence in detail.
The Court is quite satisfied that there was evi-
dence on which the Court Martial could find on
a proper direction that there was a mutiny, and
it is not for us to criticise the finding provided
there was evidence on which they could come
to the decision they did. For the reasons which
I have endeavoured to state as shortly as I can,
the Court is of opinion that there was no misdi-
rection; that, although perhaps, criticism could
be made of the words the Judge-Advocate used
when he made his interlocutory observation,
there was a perfectly fair direction and nothing
was said by the Judge-Advocate which could
have misled the Court Martial. Therefore, on all
these grounds the appeals should, we think, be
dismissed.”

592. This case is quite distinguishable in view
of the observations made above that there is no legal
evidence to show that the accused persons commit-
ted mutiny under the Army Act and they were also
not tried and convicted for mutiny. In the above
case, there are legal evidence in support of the
charge of mutiny relying upon which the Court
Martial found those officers guilty of mutiny. In this
case the accused persons were not on ‘active serv-
ice’ and they did not commit a ‘civil offence’ within
the meaning of section 8(2) of the Army Act and
therefore, the criminal Court had acted in excess of
jurisdiction in convicting them. Even then, in order
to avoid controversy, the learned Sessions Judge has
accorded sanction from the prescribed authority for
trial of the appellants and other accused persons,
although their act does not come within the ambit of
the Army Act. Therefore, I find no substance in the


            
objection raised by the learned Counsels for the
appellants,

593. Criminal conspiracy

Now turning to the point of criminal conspiracy, it is contended by the learned Counsels for the
appellants that the prosecution has failed to prove
the charge of criminal conspiracy for committing
murder by adducing reliable evidence; but on the
contrary, the evidence on record disclose a case of
conspiracy to commit mutiny to change the
Government of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Learned
Counsels argued that there is absolutely no evidence
in support of the charge of criminal conspiracy for
killing Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
his family members, rather the evidence of Lieu ten-
ant Colonel Abul Basher BA (PW 7), Lieutenant
Colonel (Retd) Abdul Hamid, (PW 9), ALD Sirajul
Haq, (PW 12), Habilder MdAminur Rahman(Retd),
(PW 24), Naik Md Yeasin (Retd) (PW 25), Md
Reajul Haque, (PW 37), Hon. Lieutenant (Retd)
Syed Ahmed, (PW 40), Col (Retd) Shafayet Jamil
(PW 44), Major General (Retd) Shafiullah, (PW 45),
Major General (Retd) Khalilur Rahman, (PW 47),
Air Vice-Martial (Retd) AK Khandaker (PW 48),
and Rear Admiral (Retd) MH Khan (PW 49), clear-
ly suggested about past transaction and in view of
the findings of the learned Judges of the High Court
Division that section 10 of the Evidence Act had no
application in the case, the existence of criminal
conspiracy is absent in this case, but the learned
Judges illegally maintained the conviction of the
appellants under section 120B of the Penal Code. In
this connection the learned Counsels have referred
the case of Kehar Singh vs State, AIR 1988 SC 1883.

On the other hand, it is contended on behalf of
the State that there are sufficient evidence on record
in support of the charge of criminal conspiracy to
commit the murder of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman and the members of his family. It is further
contended that the defence having admitted that
there was criminal conspiracy to commit mutiny, but
failed to substantiate its plea, the appellants could
not escape from the charge of criminal conspiracy to
commit murder. It is further contended that in view
of the admission of the appellants that they have
conspired to commit an offence, and the evidence of
LD Bashir Ahmed (PW 11), ALD Sirajul Haq

(Suspen) (PW 12), Dafadar Shafiuddin Sarde,
(Retd) (PW 13), Dafader Abdul Jabbar Mridha (Retgy
(PW 14), Resalder Abdul Alim Mollah (PW >;
Habilder Md Aminur Rahman (Retd) (PW 24) ngiy
Md Yeasin (Retd)(PW 25), Subader Major (Retd)
Anisul Haque Chowdhury (PW 35), Resalder Munsy,
Ahmed (PW 39), Hon. Licutenant (Retd) Syed Ahmeg
(PW 40), Colonel (Retd) Shafayet Jamil (PW 44) ang
Syed Siddiqur Rahman, curator (PW 53), the learney
Judges of the High Court Division have committed yg
miscarriage of justice in maintaining the charge of
criminal conspiracy to commit murder of
Bangabandhu and other members of his family.

594. A conspiracy is a matter of inference
deduced from certain criminal acts of the parties
accused done in pursuance of an apparent criminal
purpose common between them. A criminal conspir.
acy consists not merely intention of two or more, but
in the agreement of two or more to do an unlawful
act or to do a lawful act by unlawful means. When
two agree to carry it into effect the very plot of act
itself, and the act of each of the parties capable of
being enforced, if lawful, possible if for a criminal
object or for the use of criminal means. The ele-
ments of criminal conspiracy are (a) an agreement
between two or more persons, (b) to do an illegal
act, or (c) to do a legal act by illegal means, and (d)
an overt act done in pursuance of the conspiracy. In
order to prove a charge of criminal conspiracy for an
offence under section 120B of the Penal Code, the
prosecution need not prove that the perpetrators
expressly agree to do or caused to be done the ille-
gal act; the agreement may be proved by necessary
implication. In a conspiracy, persons are often
required to do various acts at various stages; even if
for the first time they come into conspiracy, at a lat-
ter stage they are members of the conspiracy pro-
vided their act is calculated to promote the object of
the conspiracy. It is no doubt true that the offence is
complete as soon as an agreement is made between
the conspirators; they would be punishable under
section 120B. The section is intended to be treated
as a continuous offence and whoever is a party to
conspiracy during the period for which he is charged
is liable under section 120B.

595, The essence of the offence is the combi-
nation of agreement, express or implied, the actus

            
reus in a conspiracy is the agreement to commit an
offence, not execution of it. It is enough if it is
shown a meeting of minds, a consensus to affect an
unlawful purpose. It can be established by direct or
circumstantial evidence. Privacy and secrecy are
more characteristic of a conspiracy, than of a loud
discussion in an elevated place open to public view.
It is not always possible to give direct evidence
about the date, place and time of the formation of
the conspiracy, about the persons that took part in
the formation, about the objects which they set
before themselves as the object of conspiracy and
about the manner in which the object of conspiracy
is to be carried out- all these are matters of inference
that can be drawn from the facts of the case.

596. A conspirator is an agent of his associ-
ates in carrying out the object of the conspiracy, His
acts and declarations are therefore, admissible
against other conspirators on the same principle as
the acts and declarations of an agent are receivable
against his principal. The rule of evidence to prove
an offence of criminal conspiracy is provided in sec-
tion 10 of the Evidence Act. This section is an
exception to the general rule that acts, statements, or
writings of a person are admissible only against
himself and not against others. The acts, statements,
or writings of a conspirator may therefore be given
in evidence against an accused if it is shown that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
accused and the persons whose acts, statements, or
writings are intended to be given in evidence were
members of a conspiracy. Strict proof of “conspira-
cy” is not necessary; what is required by the section
is that there should be “reasonable grounds” to
believe that the accused and the persons whose acts,
statements, or things are sought to be given in evi-
dence have conspired to commit an offence.

597. Under the common law conspiracy con-
sists in an agreement between two or more persons
to achieve an unlawful object—unlawful being used
in a special sense here. The offence consists in the
combining. So long as such a design rests in inten-
tion only, it is not indictable. When two agree to
carry it into effect, the very plot is an act in itself.
The offence is, therefore, complete though no fur-
ther act is done in pursuance of the agreement and,
provided that the stage of negotiations has been

passed, it will be a conspiracy even “where the par-
ties had not settled the means to be employed.” Even
if the stage of negotiations has not been passed, a
conviction for attempted conspiracy may be possi-
ble.

598. There does not have to be direct commu-
nication between the alleged conspirators. If A com-
municates with B and C, or A communicates with B
who himself communicates with C, all three may be
convicted as co-conspirators. This rule is particular-
ly important in the light of the special rules of evi-
dence which apply to conspiracy (below). It is not
necessary that a person charged with conspiracy
should also be an accomplice. In the words of Dr
Glanville Williams;

“Mere knowledge of and mental consent to
crime about to be committed by another does
not make a mana conspirator, but quite a slight
participation in the plan will be sufficient.”

599. Indeed, if A incites B to commit a crime
and B agrees to do so, A and B will, jointly be guilty
of conspiracy. A will, of course, also be guilty of
incitement.

600. The object of the rule is to ensure that
one person shall not be responsible for the acts or
deeds of another until some bond in the nature of an
agency has been established between them. It is nec-
essary to prove the existence of a conspiracy and to
connect the accused with it in the first incident
whether the witness seeks to give any evidence
against him, the act, or declaration of co-conspirator.
It is not necessary that it should be established by
direct evidence that the accused and other conspira-
tors whose acts, statements or writings are sought to
be given in evidence against him entered into a for-
mal consultation of agreement to commit an
offence. As in cases of conspiracy direct evidence is
rarely available, a conspiracy may be proved by the
surrounding circumstances or by antecedent or sub-
sequent conduct of the accused. A conspiracy need
not be established by prove which actually brings
the parties together. It may be shown like any other
fact by circumstantial evidence. As observed above,
in order to prove the criminal conspiracy to commit
the particular offence it is necessary to show that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that the

            
accused and other persons whose acts, statements or
writings are intended to be given in evidence were
members of the criminal conspiracy and if prima
facie evidence of the existence of a criminal con-
spiracy is given and accepted the evidence of state-
ment, act or deed made by one conspirator in refer-
ence to the common intention becomes admissible
against all.

601. Anwarul Huq, J speaking for the majori-
ty of the Supreme Court of Pakistan in Zulfigar Ali
Bhutto vs State PLD 1979 SC 53 observed as fol-
lows:

“In criminal law a party is not generally
responsible for the acts and declarations of oth-
ers unless they have been expressly directed, or
assented to by him; “nemo reus est nisi mens sit
rea”. This section, however, is based on the
concept of agency in cases of conspiracy,
Conspiracy connotes a partnership in crime or
actionable wrong. A conspirator is considered
to be an agent of his associates in carrying out
the objects of the conspiracy and anything said,
done or written by him, during the continuance
of the conspiracy, in reference to the common
intention of the conspirators, is a relevant fact
against each one of his associates, for the pur-
pose of proving the conspiracy as well as for
showing that he was a party to it. Each is an
agent of the other in carrying out the object of
the conspiracy and in doing anything in further-
ance of the common design.”

602. The expressions “in reference to their
common intention” used in section 10 of the
Evidence Act implies that the act intended is in the
future and the section makes relevant statements
made by a conspirator with reference to the future.
This expression means in reference to what, at the
time of statement, was intended in the future.
Narratives coming from the conspirators as to their
past acts cannot be said to have a reference to their
common intention. It is thus clear that after the com-
mon intention of conspiracy was no longer operat-
ing and had ceased to exist, is admissible against
other party. Section 10 of the Evidence Act will
come in to play only when the Court is satisfied that
there is reasonable ground to believe that two or
more persons have conspired together to commit an

offence or an actionable wrong, that is to say, ther,
should be a prima facie evidence that a person Was
a party to the conspiracy before his act can be useg
against his conspirators, Once such a reason; .
ground exists, anything said, done or written by on.
of the conspirators in reference to the common
intention, after the said intention was entertaine
relevant against others, not only for the purpose o¢
proving the existence of the conspiracy but also fo
proving that the other person was a party to it. The
evidentiary value of the said act is limited by two
circumstances, namely, that the act shall be in refer.
ence to their common intention and in respect of g
period after such period was entertained by any one
of them.

603. The word ‘intention’ implies that the act
intended is in the future, and the action makes the
relevant statements made up by a conspirator with
reference to the future. Anything said, done or writ.
ten’ by any of the conspirators is admissible under
this section, if it is in reference of their common
intention, even though it is not in furtherance of
their common design. Accordingly anything said,
done or written by a conspirator after the conspiracy
was formed will be evidence against other conspira-
tors whether it was said, done, or written before,-
during or after the other conspirators participated in
the conspiracy. When specific acts done by each of
the accused have been established showing their
conviction with their common intention, they are
also admissible against other accused.

604. Section 10 has a reference to section
120A of the Penal Code which provides:

“when two or more persons agree to do, or
cause to be done, (a) an illegal act, or (2) an act
which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agree-
ment is designated a criminal conspiracy.”

A proviso has been added which provides that
no agreement except an agreement to commit
offence shall amount to conspiracy. Therefore, it is
apparent that a prima facie case of conspiracy has t0
be established for the application of section 10 of
the Evidence Act. There must be reasonable ground
to believe that two or more persons have conspired
together in the light of the language of section 120A
of the Penal Code. In Bhagwan Swarup vs State of

            
Maharashtra, AIR 1965 SC 682 the scope and tenor
of section 10 of the Evidence Act has been elicited
that as the opening words of this section indicate,
will come into play only when the Court is satisfied
that there is reasonable ground to believe that two or
more persons have conspired together to commit an
offence or an actionable wrong, that is to say, there
should be a prima facie evidence that a person was
a party to the conspiracy before his acts can be used
against his conspirators. Once such a reasonable
round exists, anything said, done or written by one
the conspirators in reference to the common
tion, after the said intention was entertained, is
relevant against the other, not only for the purpose
proving the existence of conspiracy but also for

only “as against each of the persons believed to be
so conspiring as well for the purpose of proving the
ence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of
showing that any such person was a party to it.
Subba Rao, J of the Supreme Court argued for the
preme Court as under:

“It can only be used for the purpose of
proving the existence of the conspiracy or that
the other party or for the purpose of showing
that such a person was not a party to the con-
spiracy. In short, the section can be analyzed as
follows: (1) there shall be a prima facie evi-
dence affording a reasonable ground for the
Court to believe that two or more persons are
members of the conspiracy; (2) if the said con-
dition is fulfilled, anything said, done or written
by any one of them in reference to their com-
mon intention will be evidence against the
other; (3) anything said, done or written by him
should have been said, done or written by him
after the intention was formed by any one of
them; (4) it would also be relevant for the said
purpose against another who entered the con-
spiracy whether it was said, done or written
before he entered the conspiracy or after he left
it; and (5) it can only be used against a co-con-
spirator and not in his favour.”

605. Similar views have been taken in
Shivanarayan Laxminarayan Joshi vs State of
Maharashtra AIR 1980 SC 439 as follows:

“In these circumstances, therefore, we are
unable to accept the contention put forward by
appellant No. 24. We may point out that under
the principle contained in section 10 of the
Evidence Act, once a conspiracy to commit an
illegal act is proved; act of one conspirator
becomes the act of the other. This principle
clearly applies to appellant No.24 once the
knowledge of the conspiracy is proved.”

606. The views taken by Subba Rao, J in
Bhagwan Swarup (Supra) have been approved by
Oza, J in Kehar Singh vs State, AIR 1988 SC1883 .
It was said that section 10 of the Evidence Act main-
ly could be divided into two parts: the first part talks
of where there is reasonable ground to believe that
two or more persons have conspired to commit an
offence or an actionable wrong, and it is only when
this condition precedent is satisfied that the subse-
quent part of the section comes into operation and it
is material to note that this part of the section talks
of reasonable grounds to believe that two or more
persons have conspired together and this evidently
has reference to section 120A where it is provided
“When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to
be done”. This further has been safeguarded by pro-
viding a proviso that no agreement except an agree-
ment to commit an offence shall amount to criminal
conspiracy. It will be therefore necessary that a
prima facie case of conspiracy has to be established
for application of section 10. The second part of sec-
tion talks of anything said, done or written by any
one of such persons in reference to the common
intention after the time when such intention was first
entertained by any one of them is relevant fact
against each of the persons believed to be so con-
spiring as well for the purpose for proving the exis-
tence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of show-
ing that any such person was a party to it. Oza, J
while concurring with the views of Subba Rao, J
observed as under:

“It is clear that this second part permits the
use of evidence which otherwise could not be
used against the accused person. It is well set-
tled that act or action of one of the accused
could not be used as evidence against the other,
But an exception has been carved out in section
10 in cases of conspiracy, The second part operates

            
 only when the first part of the section is
clearly established i.e, there must be reasonable
ground to believe that two or more persons have
conspired together in the light of the language
of section! 20A, It is only then the evidence of
action or statements made by one of the
accused, could be used as evidence against the
other.”

607, It is not correct to say that the learned
Judges of the High Court Division observed that
section 10 of the Evidence Act would not apply in
this case for proving the charge of Criminal
Conspiracy, The learned Judges were of the view
that the confessional statements could not be used as
substantive evidence in view of section 10 of the
Evidence Act. Let us examine whether there is reli-
able evidence in support of the charge of criminal
conspiracy. According to the prosecution, the
accused appellants along with other accused persons
hatched up a conspiracy for the killing of then
President Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the members
of his family with a view to mitigate their personal
vengeance and also to fulfil their ambition, and with
that end in view, they arranged a night parade on
14th August, 1975, and at the night parade the
appellant Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
and other co-accused incited the jawans attended
there by giving different speeches which they
believed as false with malafide motive to secure
their support for the fulfilment of the criminal
object, that the accused officers compelled the
troops to take arms and ammunition from the kote
although it was strictly prohibited as per rules, that
despite that there was no provision for amalgama-
tion of two units of army in the parade, the accused
ignoring the rules with a view to fulfil their criminal
object, amalgamated the troops of Lancer and
Artillery units, that there was no convention or rule
to continue the night parade beyond 11-00 PM but
the officers ignoring the convention compelled the
troops to continue the parade till the early hours of
15th August, that in course of continuation of the
parade the accused officers secretly discussed
amongst themselves and that thereafter they along
with the troops marched towards the city, took con-
trol of the key points such as, Minto Road, Radio
Station, Rakshibahini and BDR headquarters and
Dhanmondi Road No.32, and then they killed the

President and other members of the family in a
planned manner. The Defence plea is that the Nigh,
parade was a normal part of yearly army Cerise
which had no nexus with the killing o,
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his fam,
ily members, that there was army revolt and as ,
consequence of mutiny Bangabandhu and his fam).
ly members were killed. Now let us consider hoy,
far the prosecution has been able to prove the
charge.

608. PW 11 stated that on reaching at the
parade ground he noticed that the parade was cop.
ducted disorderly, that at the parade Major Faruque
Rahman came along with Major Ahmed Hossain,
and then Major Faruque Rahman, Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and other officers went into the office of
Major Mohiuddin (Lancer), that he noticed some
persons in white dress in the office of Major
Mohiuddin, that he guessed them as officers, that at
about 12 at mid-night, he came out of his room and
noticed that the white dressed persons were coming
out from the office of Major Mohiuddin, followed
by Major Mohiuddin and thereafter, Mohiuddin
called Huda to come nearer to him, that at that time
Major Huda told Major Dalim to wait for some time
and then he approached towards Major Mohiuddin,
when Major Mohiuddin arranged uniform for them.
The statements of this witness sufficiently proved
that besides the army personnel, some officers in
civil dress came and joined them, who were subse-
quently detected as army officers Major Dalim and
Major Huda. He further stated that the parade con-
tinued beyond the schedule time. It also appeared
from the statement of this witness; Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer) took Major Faruque, Major
Ahmed Shariful Hossain, Major Nurul Huq,
Lieutenant Kismot Hashem and others into his
office from the parade ground at midnight and had
confidential discussions when the removed army
officers also attended with them. This witness fur-
ther stated that the parade was directed to fall-in
again at about 3-30 AM and thereafter he took arms
from the kote and then the Jawans were divided into
groups and at that time, Major Mohiuddin briefed
the Jawans for marching. This witness further stated
that they marched and reached at road No.32 at 4-30
AM where Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
was residing. The defence did not cross-examine

            
this Witness as regards his statement that the parade
was conducted disorderly, that he found Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer) and Major Faruque in the
parade along with other officers in civil dress, that
Major Mohiuddin and those officers in civil dress
went into his office and discussed till 12 at night,
that thereafter he arranged dress for those officers
and that thereafter, in the early hours on 15th August
they marched to Bangabandhu’s house with arms.

609. PW 12 stated that at the parade ground,
he found Major Faruque Rahman, Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and some other accused persons, that the
parade continued till 3-30 AM and thereafter, they
were asked to fall-in, that at the parade ground he
noticed that Syed Faruque Rahman, Major Mohi-
uddin (Lancer), Major Shariful Ahmed Hossain,
Lieutenant Nazmul Hossain Ansar were secretly
talking with JCO’s by the side of the parade ground
and thereafter, they came in front of them. He fur-
ther stated that he noticed three unknown officers
with uniform, that Major Faruque Rahman intro-
duced them as Major Dalim, Captain Bazlul Huda
but he could not recollect the name of other person,
that Major Faruque Rahman briefed them that on
15th August a meeting would be held at University
wherein Sheikh Mujibur Rahman would declare
monarchy, that they did not support monarchy and
that they would have to follow the directions to be
given by him and other officers. He further stated
that thereafter Major Faruque Rahman directed
them to take arms from the kote and as per such
direction; they took arms from the kote. He further
stated that Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) thereupon
directed them to board into the vehicle and as per his
direction; they boarded in four trucks and noticed
that two other trucks with jawans were also present
there and subsequently he came to know that they
were jawans of Artillery unit, who would participate
with them. He further stated that they jointly
marched via Balurghat, Mohakhali Road, Farm gate
and reached at the meeting point of road No, 32 and
that Mohiuddin directed them not to allow any per-
Sons to move through the road and that Mohiuddin
told them that if they heard any sounds of firing they
would not be frightened as they were theirs own
people. The testimony of this witness clearly proved
about criminal conspiracy, inasmuch as, the parade
continued till 3-30 AM , that there was confidential

talks between the officers including the appellants
Faruque Ahmed and Mohiuddin (Lancer), that there
was also amalgamation of jawans of two units, that
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman incited
them and that after taking ammunition they marched
towards the road in the early hours of 15th August.

610. PW 13 isa member of Lancer unit and he
also attended the night parade. He stated that at the
night parade Major Faruque Rahman and Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer) were present, that the parade
continued till 3-30 AM and at that time Major
Khondker Rashid (Artillery) came to their unit and
then Moslemuddin and other army officers came
there and boarded on a truck and then they directed
them to follow them. He further stated that their
vehicle stopped at Mohakhali where he noticed the
jawans of Artillery unit were standing there, that at
that time one officer from artillery unit boarded in
their vehicle, that thereafter they approached
towards Indira Road- Mirpur Road-Satmasjid Road
and then their vehicle stopped at the meeting point
of road on the Mirpur Road. From the testimony of
this witness it is proved that the night parade con-
tinued till late night and then the troops with officers
marched towards Mohakhali where they found pres-
ence of the forces of Artillery unit there, that Maj
Rashid came to their unit at midnight and that their
vehicle stopped at the meeting point of road in the
early hours of 15th August.

611. PW 14 stated that he was a member of
Lancer unit. He also attended the night parade which
continued till the late hours of 14th August. He
found Major Faruque, Major Mohiuddin (Lancer),
Major Ahmed Shariful Hossain, Lieutenant Kismot
and Lieutenant Nazmul Hossain Ansar and some
other persons in civil dress. He also noticed some
officers of Artillery unit with Major Rashid. He stat-
ed that Major Faruque directed them to fall-in and
told them that for an emergency task they were
directed to fall-in and then he introduced the persons
in civil dress as Major Dalim and Major Shahriar.
He further stated that Major Faruque told them that
these two officers would work with them and that
they were required to follow their directions and
reminded them that in case of any negligence of
duty, they would be dealt with severely. He further
stated that at about 4-00 AM, Major Faruque directed


            
 for moving of the tanks and Faruque commanded
‘one tank, that the tanks started approaching at the
same time and some tanks came at Radio Station-via
Balurghat-Cantonment-Mahakhali and after reach-
ing there, Major Shahriar, Major Dalim, Major
Shariful Hossain talked for some time and then they
entered into the Radio Station and some time there-
after, Major Faruque and Major Khondker Rashid
entered into the Radio Station. The statement of this
witness that the parade continued till the late night,
that some army officers attended in civil dress, that
two units of army jointly marched with tanks
towards the Radio Station and some of the accused
persons entered into the Radio Station with tanks
proved their acts as part of criminal conspiracy.

612. “PW 17 stated that he was a member of
Antillery unit during the relevant time and Major
Mohiuddin (Artillery) was commander of Papa
Battery. He further stated that he attended the night
parade and it continued till 12 at night and there-
after, as per direction of Habilder of cannon unit
No.1, they took cannon-balls. He further stated that
he noticed that the regiment officers were talking
behind the cannons at the time of night parade. He
Tecognised amongst the officers talking there were
Major Khondker Abdur Rashid, Major Mohiuddin
(Antillery), Captain Mostafa and Captain Jahangir
and two others. He further stated that some time
thereafter Major Mohiuddin approached there and
gave some instructions to Subedar Hashem and
thereafter Hashem directed the force to board into
the trucks and thereafter Hashem hooked six can-
nons six trucks. Thereafter the trucks loaded with
cannon started moving at 3-30/4-00 AM. He was in
the vehicle with Major Mohiuddin (Artillery). Their
truck stopped beside the Dhanmondi Lake at 4-00
AM and then Mohiuddin directed them to install the
cannons aiming the Road No.32 and Rakshibahani
Headquarter and as per his direction, the cannons
were fixed aiming Road No.32. He further stated
that Mohiuddin directed them to fire cannon-balls
whenever he would direct them to do so. Some time
thereafter, they heard sounds of firing from the
house of Bangabandhu and at that time, as per direc-
tion of Mohiuddin they fired 4 rounds of cannon-
balls. The defence did not challenge the testimony
of this witness and therefore, his testimony that as
per direction of Mohiuddin, they installed cannon

and fired of cannon-balls remains uncontroverteg
The evidence of this witness proved that the appel.
lants carried heavy artillery with them and that there
were confidential talks between the officers,

613. PW 18 stated that he was a gunner of
Artillery unit in which Khondker Abdur Rashid was
commanding officer and Major Mohiuddin (Anil.
lery) was battery commander. He attended at the
night parade. He further stated that in their Papa battery they had six cannons with them. He further stated that as per direction of Major Mohiuddin, they
moved towards Balurghat-via New Airport with
cannons. They continued their night training till |2.
30/1-00 AM He further stated that in course of training Khondker Abdur Rashid and Major Mohiuddin(Artillery) inspected the parade. He further stated that at about 3-30/4-00 AM Abul Kalam directed their guns to amalgamate and to hook them with the vehicle. He further stated that after they were made fell in, Captain Jahangir in presence of Major Mohiuddin told them that they had to perform an emergency work and it was to check Rakshi bahini and directed them to follow their vehicle. He then narrated about the manner of marching of their unit towards Rakshibahini Headquarter. This witness also proved that the parade continued till the early hours of 15th August and that they carried heavy arms with them on a false premise to check Rakhibahini.

614. PW 21 stated that he was a jawan of
Artillery unit in which Khondker Rashid was com-
manding officer and Major Mohiuddin was com-
mander of Papa Battery. He also attended the night
parade, He stated that at about 2-00 AM Major
Rashid, Major Mohiuddin, Captain Bazlul Huda and
some other officers came at the Airport runway
where they were taking rest. At that time Major
Rashid told them to get ready with arms and ammu-
nition as they were required to move for an emer-
gency duty. As per his direction, they took ammuni-
tion and thereafter Captain Bazlul Huda directed
them to board into the tucks and then the trucks
started towards Dhanmondi. He further stated that at
about 4-00/4-30 AM some of them were directed to
get down from the truck at Road No. 32 and direct-
ed them not to allow any person to move through the
Road No. 32. He also proved that the appellants car
ried heavy arms and ammunition with them and


            
marched to the Road No.32 from the parade ground,
where Bangabandhu had been living.

615. PW 22 stated that he was a jawan of
Autllery unit and he attended the night parade on
the fateful night. He stated that the parade continued
till 12 at night and afier taking some rest at about 2-
00/2-30 AM, Khondker Abdur Rashid came there
with Major Mohiuddin, Captain Mostafa, Captain
Bazlul Huda and some other unknown officers. At
that time Major Abdur Rashid enquired about their
arms and they showed their arms and then he told
them that they would be taken to an emergency
work and that in case of necessity, they would use
their arms, and that they took ammunition in their
truck. He further stated that BHM divided them in
groups and directed them to board into the trucks.
He further stated that their truck moved towards the
Road No. 32 and at the time of Fazar Azan, some of
them were directed to get down from the truck at
Road No. 32. They were directed not to allow any-
body to enter into Road No. 32. The defence did not
challenge the incriminating portion of his testimony.
This witness proved marching of the jawans under
the supervision of the appellants with heavy arms
from the parade ground towards Dhanmondi and
then the jawans got down from the vehicle at Road
in the early hours on 15th August.

616. PW 23 stated that he was a jawan of
Lancer unit and he attended the night parade on 14th
August. He also stated that Major Faruque came in
front of the tank and talked for some time with
Lieutenant Kismot and thereafter Lieutenant Kismot
directed Resalder Shamsul Hoque to make the
squadron fell-in. Thereafter Major Faruque,
Lieutenant Kismot and Resalder Shamsul Huq came
there when Major Faruque directed for the move-
ment of the tanks outside and queried to the Jawans
amongst them who could operate tanks. Thereafter
as per his direction six drivers of the tanks and some
other jawans were picked up from amongst them
and then he distributed the jawans for boarding in
six tanks and also divided the duties of the officers.
He further stated that at about 3-00/3-30 AM, Major
Faruque Rahman again came and as per his direc-
tion, the officers and the jawans boarded into the
tanks and then the tanks were removed from the
garage and kept them in queue position at the signal

gate, Thereafter Major Faruque boarded in a tank
and directed the other officers to board on the other
tanks and as per his direction, the tanks moved
towards south, This witness proved the movement
of the tanks from the cantonment as per direction of
Faruque Rahman in the early hours of 15th August.

PW 24 stated that he was a jawan of Artillery
unit during the relevant time, that he attended the
night parade as per direction of Major Khondker
Abdur Rashid, and that they marched to Airport as
per his direction. He further stated that before their
marching they were directed to take arms with them.
He further stated that Major Rashid told them that
they would have to move at different places for
emergency works and thereafter their battery com-
mander took them to Lancer unit. He found the
jawans of Lancer unit in fall-in condition. The com-
manding officer of Lancer unit Syed Faruque
Rahman amalgamated both the units together and
briefed them. At that time he noticed the presence of
some officers of Artillery unit. He also noticed some
removed army officers there. Khondker Rashid and
Syed Faruque introduced those officers as Major
Dalim, Major Rashed Chowdhury, Major Shahriar
and Captain Majed. Thereafter Khondker Abdur
Rashid and Major Dalim delivered speeches stating
that they liberated the country at the cost of blood,
the present Government failed to protect the mod-
esty of the womenfolk-the people are dying for star-
vation- thus the Government should be toppled.
Thereafter Major Syed Faruque Rahman and Major
Abdur Rashid directed them to take ammunition and
as per their direction they took ammunition from the
armoury. Thereafter they marched towards the city.

617. The evidence of this witness proved that
the parade continued till late-night in which some
dismissed army officers also attended, who were not
supposed to remain present there, that they took
arms before they marched towards the town as per
direction of Major Faruque and Major Rashid, that
Major Dalim and Major Rashid incited the jawans
that they would topple the Government by giving
speeches which they believed to be false, and that
two units of army were amalgamated before the
troops marched towards the town, The defence did
not challenge the testimony of this witness so far as
it related to amalgamation of two units of Lancer


            
and Artillery by Major Faruque; Major Faruque’s
briefing to the units and the presence of Major
Abdur Rashid there. In course of cro ‘amination,
this witness stated that there was no provision for
joint parade of different units in the night parade. He
reaffirmed his statements in chief that as per direc-
tion of Major Faruque, their unit was amalgamated
with Lancer unit. There is also no denial that as per
direction of Major Faruque and Major Rashid they
took ammunition with them.

618. PW 25 is a jawan of artillery unit during
the relevant time. He also attended the night parade
and stated that at about 3-00/3-30 AM, they were
made to fall-in as per direction of Captain Mostafa
and then they marched at an open space of tank unit
and noticed the presence of jawans of tank unit, He
further stated that they were divided into six groups.
Major Khondker Abdur Rashid, their commanding
officer and Major Faruque Rahman, the commend-
ing officer of the tank briefed them. Major Rashid,
Captain Mostafa, Major Dalim, Captain Majed and
other officers were present there. Major Dalim gave
a speech there followed by Major Faruque and
Rashid. They stated that they liberated the country
in exchange of many lives-the Government failed to
protect the modesty of mothers and sisters- people
were dying for starvation- the Government should
be toppled. Thereafter they directed them to take
ammunition and .then as per their order, they
marched towards the house of Minister Abdur Rob
Semiabat. Thereafter he narrated the incident of
killing of the family members of Shemiabat. In
course of cross-examination by Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin, this witness stated that the ammunition
was piled up in front of Lancer ammunition store
and as per order of Major Faruque Rahman they
took ammunition. The testimony of this witness
revealed that the jawans of Artillery unit were amal-
gamated with tank unit jawans and that Major
Faruque, Major Rashid and Major Dalim delivered
speeches for toppling the Government and as per
their direction, they took ammunition with them.
The testimony of this witness was not challenged by
the defence in any manner.

619. PW 26 stated that he was jawan of
Artillery unit during the relevant time in which
Major Mohiuddin (Artillery) was commander of

Papa Battery. He stated that Major Khondker Abdur
Rashid directed him to keep the key Of ammunition,
store with him. He further stated that at about j_
00/11-30 AM Major Khondker Abdur Rashid and
Captain Jahangir came in front of ammunition store
with 10/12 jawans of Artillery and Lancer units, Ay
per direction of Rashid he unlocked the ammunition,
store and then as per his direction the jawans took
ammunition of cannon, rifle, stengun, SMG, pisto}
etc, The testimony of this witness has not been chal.
lenged by the defence and therefore, his testimony
remains uncontroverted.

620. PW 27 stated that he was a jawan of field
Artillery during the relevant time, that he attended
the night parade and then from the parade ground
they marched towards new Airport road, that at
about 3-00/3-30 AM Major Mohiuddin (Artillery)
came there and directed them to fall-in and also
directed some jawans to board into the vehicle with
Major Mohiuddin. Major Mohiuddin told them that
the Rakshibahani would attack army and they
should prepare for such eventuality. He saw one
cannon was hooked with the vehicle, four other can-
nons were also hooked in other vehicles. Thereafter
they marched towards Mohakhali- Farm Gate-
Green Road- Elephant Road- Mirpur Road and then
came to Kalabagan area near the lake and they were
directed to get down from the vehicle. Major
Mohiuddin (Artillery) directed them not to allow
anybody to move through this road. The testimony
of this witness has not been challenged by the
defence. He proved that the officers incited the
jawans by delivering false speeches that
Rakhibahini would attack them and by making them
believe to the false pretext, they were compelled to
carry heavy artillery with them in order to fulfil their
object.

621. PW 32 stated that he was a jawan of
Artillery unit, in which, Major Mohiuddin was their
commander. He attended the night parade and at the
parade he recognised Major Khondker Abdur
Rashid, Major Mohiuddin, (Artillery), Major Zubair
Siddique, Captain Mostafa and Lieutenant Hasan.
He stated that the parade continued till 3-00/3-30
AM, when Habilder Muzaffar made them to fall-in.
At that time those officers including Major Dalim
were also present there. As per direction of Rashid,

            
Habilder Mostafa directed them to board in 3/4
trucks and thereafter kote NCO Shamsul Islam gave
them ammunition, The testimony of this witness has
pot been challenged by the defence and the same
remain uncontroverted, He then stated that they pro-
ceeded for some time and then they were directed to
get down on the road beside Tejgaon airport. He fur-
ther stated that they were directed not to permit any-
pody to move through the road.

622. PW 34 stated that he was a jawan of
Artillery unit, in which, Major Mohiuddin
(Anillery) was Battery Commander. He also attend-
ed the parade. He stated that after the parade they
marched to the new Airport with six tanks. At about
10-00 PM, he heard sound of Major Mohiuddin’s
gun firing and at that time he was talking with gun-
ners. He further stated that at about 2-30 AM they
were made to fall-in and directed them to board ina
vehicle. They marched towards Mirpur road via
Farm Gate towards the eastern side of the lake and
then they took their position there. The guns were
set in there. At that time Major Mohiuddin
(Artillery) stood behind the gun and directed them
not to allow any person to move through the road.
The defence also did not challenge his statement.

PW 39 stated that he was a driver of lancer unit
during the relevant time and in his unit Major
Faruque was the commanding officer-in-charge. He
also attended the night parade. He found Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer), Major Shariful Islam and other
accused persons were present at the parade. He stat-
ed that Major Faruque told them that for an emer-
gency purpose the tanks would be moved outside
and directed them to get ready. Thereafter he told the
jawans and officers to resume their duties. At that
time, he stated, Major Dalim and another officer
came to their unit. Major Dalim wanted uniform and
he was supplied him the uniform. He further stated
that the tank unit marched via Airport towards
Bangabhaban. The evidence of this witness revealed
that though there was no provision for taking tank
outside the cantonment, on the fateful night the
tanks were moved towards the town and that the
removed army officers in civil dress attended the
parade,

623. PW 40 stated that he was a Lieutenant of
Lancer unit during the relevant time. He claimed

that he attended the night parade in which Major
Faruque was their commander. He handed over the
parade to Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) who then
handed over the parade to Major Faruque. He stated
that the parade continued till 2-00/3-00 AM
although it was supposed to close up at 12 at night.
He further stated that Major Faruque told him to
take care about the regiment and to close down the
gate, In reply to his query, Major Faruque told him
that they were going to remove the autocratic
Government. The defence did not challenge the t
timony of this witness although this witness spe
cally stated that Major Faruque and other persons
were moving to topple the Government.

624. PW 44 stated that after the arrival of
repatriated army officers from Pakistan, dissatisfac-
tion amongst the officers cropped up over their pro-
motion, salary and other benefits, that by the same
time propaganda were circulated within the army
over the allocation of budget of the Rakhibahini,
that at that time Major Dalim harassed some politi-
cal workers on the plea of recovery of arms for mit-
igating previous grudge, that Major Dalim was
removed from the service for disorderly acts, that in
consequence thereof Major Noor Chowdhury
attacked the Government by using slang language,
that there was no provision for joint night training of
two units of army, that there was also no provision
for taking live ammunition at the night training and
that at about 6-00 AM of 15th August, he woke up
on hearing the sounds kicking on the door and on
opening the door he saw that Major along with two
other officers with heavy arms in front of the door
who declared that they had captured power under
Khandaker Moshtaque-Sheikh was killed and
wamed him not to take any action against them.
From his evidence it is found the seeds of conspira-
cy were sown after the creation of Rakhibahini by
the accused persons. He proved that there was pro-
hibition for joint night training of two units of army
with ammunition. The defence did not challenge the
incriminating part of his testimony.

625. PW 53 stated that he was a Subedar
Major of Artillery unit in which Major Mohiuddin
(Artillery) was Papa Battery Commander. He fur-
ther stated that Major Syed Faruque Rahman used to
visit the office of their commanding officer Major

            
 Abdur Rashid and talked with him many times in
the month of August, 1975, He further stated that
Major Rashid arranged the night training pro-
gramme in August and as per programme, he
arranged the 14th August night for the purpose. He
further stated that Major Mohiuddin took over
parade from Captain Jahangir and then he handed
over the parade to Major Rashid, He further stated
that at about 10-00 PM Major Rashid and Major
Faruque came to the verandah of his office and some
time there after, they jointly left the place with a
jeep.

626. These are the evidence in support of the
charge of criminal conspiracy to implement the
object of killing Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman and his family members. From these evi-
dence, it is proved that Lieutenant Colonel Rashid
arranged the joint night parade on 14th night with a
view to fulfil their premeditated plan of conspiracy.
As a part of conspiracy, the parade was dragged on
till the early hours of 15th August, and in the said
parade removed army officers also attended. The
officers talked secretly in the office of Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and then by the side of the parade ground,
they incited the jawans by giving false speeches that
Rakhibahini would attack them and it was also
pointed out that unless the President was removed,
he would declare monarchy in the country on 15th
August. They in fact, concealed their plan to the
jawans that they were going to kill the President lest
their plan was frustrated and told them to topple the
Government. They took heavy arms and ammuni-
tion like tank, cannon, etc. which could only be used
during the war time. They amalgamated two units of
army violating the established army rules and
moved with heavy artillery outside cantonment, and
deployed armed troops with’ officers at key points
before they moved to the house of Bangabandhu.

627. From the above evidence it has been
proved that PWs 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 25, 35, 39
and 40 have recognised Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman, PWs 11, 12, 14 and 39 have recognised
Major AKM Mohiuddin Ahmed, PWs 17, 18, 21,
22, 26, 27, 32, 34 and 53 have recognised
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery),
PWs 14 and 24 recognised Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahrior Rashid Khan, and PWs 11, 12, 21

and 22 recognised Major Bazlul Huda at the nigj,
parade ground where they made their preparation, of
the criminal conspiracy to kill the President and oy},
ers. The defence did not challenge the incriminating
part of the evidence of these witnesses about theip
complicity in the criminal conspiracy.

628. According to the prevailing criming
jurisprudence being followed over a century in oy;
Courts, the prosecution is required to prove its case
beyond all reasonable doubt and the defence need no prove its case. If from the lips of the witnesses jp
course of their cross-examination or from the sugges.
tions given to the witnesses the defence has been able to bring out something which is favourable to them, it will get the benefit of doubt, Though the defence need not require to prove anything, if the defence raises a special plea in support of its case, the burden to prove the existence of that fact lies upon the defence in view of section 105 of the Evidence Act. If the defence admits a fact in course of taking its defence but fails to substantiate its claim, then certainly the said fact will go against it. In this case the defence has admitted that the acts of the appellants and other accused are criminal conspiracy to commit mutiny, but it has utterly failed to substantiate its claim.

629. If the accused sets up a plea that he is
protected by one of the exceptions, general or spe-
cial, in the Penal Code, or any other law defining the
offence, the burden of proving the exception
undoubtedly lies upon him. But this burden is only
undertaken by the accused, if the prosecution case
establishes that in the absence of such a plea he
would be guilty of the offence charged. If the prose-
cution does not establish affirmatively that the
accused had done any act which rendered him liable
for the offence but the accused raises a plea amount-
ing to a confession of guilt, the Court can convict
him relying upon that plea, but if the plea amounts
to admission of facts and raises a plea of justifica-
tion, the Court cannot proceed to deal with the case
as if the admission of facts which were not part of
the prosecution case was true. Since the defence has
admitted the prosecution case of criminal conspira-
cy but fails to substantiate its plea the reasonable
conclusion that can be inferred is that they have par-
ticipated in the incident other than that has been
taken in their defence.

            
630. The circumstantial evidence such as the
meetings of the accused persons at the night pi
on 14th August, the communications and the trans
mission of thoughts sharing the unlawful design
which are difficult to prove but relevant in the case,
their approach to the place of occurrence and other
key points with heavy arms and ammunition from
the night parade in the early hours of 15th August,
the deployment of troops with heavy arms at key
points and in consequence of such conspiracy, their
subsequent act are sufficient to come to the conclu-
jon that the appellants along with other co-accused
hatched up criminal conspiracy to kill the then
President and other members of his family. The
High Court Division, in the premises, is justified in
finding the appellants guilty of the charge of crimi-
nal conspiracy,

631. Confession

It was contended on behalf of the appellants
that the confessional statements of Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan and Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) were pro-
cured by torture and coercion by the police after
keeping them on police remand for a long time and
therefore, the confessions not being voluntary could
not be the basis for the conviction. It was further
contended that the confessions of these accused
were not voluntary would be apparent from the rea-
sonings and findings given by first learned Judge
and therefore, the conviction of the appellants rely-
ing upon them is illegal. It was further urged that
since the learned Judges of the Division Bench were
equally divided in their opinions as regards the con-
fessional statements of Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan and Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, it was obligatory on the part of the
Third learned Judge to consider their confessional
statements, but the Third learned Judge having not
considered them, the conviction of the appellants
relying upon these confessions is illegal and without
jurisdiction.

632. Mr Anisul Hug and Mr Mahbubey Alam,
on the other hand, contended that the first leamed
Judge while disbelieving the confessions not only
misread the materials on record, but also on a mis-
conception of law disbelieved the confessions. In

refuting the claim of the learned Counsels for the
defence, it was contended that in no case the con-
fessing accused were kept in police custody before
recording their statements beyond the statutory peri-
od provided in section 167(2) of the Code. In this
connection, the learned Attorney-General drew our
attention to the statements of PW 61 and submitted
that the appellant Faruque Rahman was taken on
police remand for 13 days on two occasions in
Lalbagh PS Case No.11(11) 75 before the institution
of the instant case on 2nd October 1996, and that
Lieutenant Colenel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan
was also taken for 15 days remand on three occa-
sions in the said case before he was shown arrested
in this case on 3rd October 1996, but the first
learned Judge without considering those facts ille-
gally disbelieved their confessions on the reasonings
that they were continuously kept in police custody
beyond the prescribed period. In view of the above,
the learned Attorney-General contended that the
findings of the first learned Judge that the confes-
sions of Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman,
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
and Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan were
not voluntary had no basis at all.

633. Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar
Rashid Khan was shown arrested in this case on 3rd
October, 1996 and he was taken on police remand
for 7 days on 30th November, 1996 and thereafter he
was taken on remand for 5 days more on 7th
December, 1996 and then his confession was
recorded on 11th December, 1996. The English ren-
dering of his confession has been meticulously
reproduced by the learned Judges. In his confession
he narrated regarding his joining in the army, his
participation in the liberation war, his posting at dif-
ferent stations and then he stated that he consented
to the proposal of co-accused Major Dalim that the
misdeeds of Sheikh Mujib were required to be
tedressed. He further narrated about the initial dis-
cussions at his business establishment at ‘Shery
Enterprise’ with some accused and then with Major
Noor, Major Aziz Pasha, Captain Bazlul Huda, at
different places with co-accused and Khandaker
Mustaque Ahmed at his residence, and the finalisa-
tion of their plan on 15th August 1975 at 10-00 PM
at his residence, and about his participation at the
night parade for implementing the premeditated

            
 plan to fulfil their object of killing, the distribution
of their duties and responsibilities at different key
points such as, at Minto Road, Radio Station,
Bangabandhu's house in the carly hours of 15th
August, the killing of Abdur Rob Semiabat and his
wife and the killing of Bangabandhu, the manner of
taking control of Radio Station and the preparation
of speech for Khondker Mustaque Ahmed by
Taheruddin Thakur, and the recording of the decla-
rations of allegiance of Chiefs of three Forces for
broadcasting, the presence of General Ziaur Rahman
and other high ranking officers at the Radio Station
and his presence at the oath taking ceremony of
Khondker Mustaque Ahmed as President of the
country and the cabinet, He has implicated all the
appellants in the incident. The statement appears to
me as inculpatory in nature. PW 51 proved his state-
ment.

634. As regards the confessional statement of
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, it
appeared that he was shown arrested on 3rd October,
1996 in this case. Thereafter he was taken on police
remand for 7 days on 12th December, 1996 and then
his confessional statement was recorded on 19th
December, 1996. His confession was also extensive-
ly reproduced in the judgments of the learned
Judges. He has narrated about his joining in the
army, his deputation at different sectors, his meeting
with Col Osmani at Calcutta during the war of lib-
eration and then his absorption in the Bangladesh
Amny in the Bengal Lancer Unit. He then narrated
regarding some incidents that occurred at
Munshiganj and Narsingdi at the time of recovery of
illegal arms and another incident relating to Major
Dalim’s wife with Gazi Golam Mostafa’s son at
Ladies Club, the removal of Major Dalim, Major
Noor and some other army personnel from the serv-
ices of army for vandalising the house of Gazi
Golam Mostafa, his discussion with Major Rashid
after the creation of BAKSAL for a change in the
country, the discussion between Major Abdur
Rashid and Khandaker Mustaque Ahmed over polit-
ical situation, his contact and discussion with Ziaur
Rahman over issue of topping Sheikh Mujib
Government, his discussion with Lieutenant
Colonel Abdur Rashid on 12th August 1975, the
finalisation of the plan on 14th August at night
parade for implementing their object in the morning

of 15th August, and his disclosure for implementin,
their plan to some accused and then he narrated j,,
briefings to the officers to implement their objec,
He also admitted that as part of conspiracy The tooy
ammunition from the armoury and the marching of
the troops from the night parade with tanks towards
the key points and the killing of Bangabandhy
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his family members
Sheikh Fazlul Hoque Moni and his wife. Then he
narrated about the subsequent events. His statemen
is inculpatory in nature and PW 51 proved his state.
ment.

635. In respect of Lieutenant Colonel Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Artillery), it appeared from the
record that he was taken on police remand for 7 days
on 19th November, 1996 and thereafter he made his
confessional statement on 27th November, 1996,
His statement was also extensively narrated by the
learned Judges of the High Court Division. He dis-
closed regarding the dissatisfaction in the ranks of
Jawans over their salary, ration and uniform, cre-
ation of Rakkhibahini, BAKSAL and the appoint-
ment of Governors. He then narrated about his con-
tact with Major Khondker Abdur Rashid and their
discussions some time in middle of May, 1975 at
Ramna Park, and showing him the locations of
Kalabagan, Lake Circus Playing ground and
Bangabandhu’s house by Rashid and then he narrat-
ed about his presence at the night training at
Balurghat, the speech of Major Faruque Rahman
about the manner of implementing their plan; the
distribution of responsibilities among the officers to
implement their plan; the marching of troops with
arms from the training ground towards Road , Minto
Road, Radio Station, BDR headquarter and the
Rakkhibahini Headquarter, the manner of setting up
cannon at Kalabagan play ground aiming
Bangabandhu’s house, and the subsequent conduct
of all the accused persons after the killing of the
President and the constitution of command council
to run the country under Khondker Mustaque
Ahmed. He admitted his participation in the incident
from Kalabagan play ground. His statement is incul
patory in nature, His statement has been proved by
PW 32.

636. PW 51 stated that he recorded the con-
fession of Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan after compliance

            
 of formalities required under section 364 of
the Code that he explained to the a d about the
contents of his statement and that after recording
statement he issued a certificate as to the correctness
of the statement. This appellant did not challenge |
statement that he did record his statement in accor-
dance With section 364, He admitted that he did not
make comment in column No.8 of the form. He
gave an explanation that as the accused did not com-
plain to him any ill treatment he did not fill up the
column. He denied the defence suggestion that he
recorded the statement of the accused under duress
and torture after he was kept in wrongful police cus
tody or that the statement was not read over to him
and that it was not voluntary, This witness also stat-
ed that he recorded the statement of Colenel Syed
Faruque Rahman after compliance of the formalities
required under section 364 of the Code, that after
recording his confession the accused was returned
back to the Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
that on the same day the CMM acknowledged the
receipt of the accused and that he issued a certifi-
cate. The confessing accused Syed Faruque Rahman
did not challenge his claim of recording statement in
accordance with the provisions required by law. He
denied the defence suggestion that at the time of
recording his statement an ASP of CID, the investi-
gating officer and other police officers were present
in his room. He admitted that he did not fill up
columns 3,4,8 and 10 of the confessional statement
form. He however, denied the defence suggestion
that the accused reported to him about police torture
after he was produced before him.

637. Md Habibur Rahman (PW 52) stated that
at the time of recording confession of Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery), he followed
the procedures provided by section 364 of the Code,
that afier recording he issued a certificate and that
the accused was sent to jail custody. This confessing
accused also did not challenge the claim of this wit-
ness that his statement was recorded in accordance
with the procedure required by law, He admitted that
the column No.1 of the form was kept blank. He
denied the defence suggestion that the accused did
not make any confession to him or that he signed a
statement after being prepared by the investigating
officer or that the signature of the accused was

obtained by force in presence of the police and that
the statement was not true or voluntary.

638. In column No.1 of the form of the state-
ment of Licutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed, it
was mentioned by PW 52 that the accused was pro-
duced at 11-00 AM on 27th November, 1996 and his
statement was recorded at 2-00 PM Therefore, it is
not correct that PW 52 did not mention the date and
time of producing the accused and the time of
recording his statement. Column Nos. 3 and 4 of the
form are the instructions and guidelines given by the
High Court Division for following by the
Magistrates while recording confessional state-
ments. Column No.3 relates to the explanation to be
given to the confessing accused each of the matters
mentioned in column 5 and to caution him to reflect
carefully before making the statement. The queries
required to confront the accused in column 5 had
been confronted in column 6. PW 51 has duly filled
up the columns and thus the accused should not
have any grievance in this regard. In course of cross-
examination this witness denied the defence sugges-
tion that at the time of recording statement any
police officer was present in his room. Column 8
relates to the brief statement of Magistrate's reason-
ing regarding his satisfaction of the voluntary nature
of the statement. PW 51 stated that it was recorded
in accordance with law and that the accused on
being satisfied of the correctness of the statement
put his signature. Column 10 contains the time of
forwarding the accused after recording confession.
PW 51 stated that after recording statement he for-
warded the accused to the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate on the same day with the record.

639. The object of putting questions to an
accused who offers to confess is to obtain an assur-
ance of the fact that the confession is not caused by
any inducement, threat or promise having reference
to the charge against him as mentioned in section 24
of the Evidence Act. There is hardly any irregulari-
ty in the recording of the statements as pointed by
the learned Counsel. The evidence on record proved
that the confessing accused was not kept in police
custody beyond the statutory period in this case. The
first learned Judge on a superficial consideration of
the record and the evidence disbelieved the state-
ments as not voluntary.


            
640. Chapter XLV of the Code deals general-
ly with irregular proceedings. There broadly speak-
ing the question is, whether the error or irregularities
has caused prejudice to the accused or as some of
the sections put it, has occasioned a failure of jus-
tice. The Code has carefully classified certain kinds
of error and expressly indicates how they have to be
dealt with. In every such case the Court is bound to
give effect to the express commands of the legisla-
ture; there is no scope for further speculation. The
only class of case in which the Courts are free to
reach a decision is that for which no express provi-
sion is made,

641. In this particular case we are concerned
with section 533 of the Code. The first learned
Judge has wrongly noticed section 537 of the Code
in considering any error or omission or irregularities
that occurs while recording confessional statement
by a Magistrate. Section 533 reads as follows:

“533. Non-compliance with provisions of
section 164 or 364(1}—If any Court, before
which a confession or other statement of an
accused person recorded or purporting to be
recorded under section 164 or section 364 is ten-
dered or has been received in evidence, finds that
any of the provisions of either of such sections
have not been complied with by the Magistrate
recording the statement, it shall take evidence
that such person duly made the statement record-
ed; and, notwithstanding anything contained in
the Evidence Act, 1872, section 91, such state-
ment shall be admitted if the error has not injured
the accused as to his defence on the merits.

(2) The provisions of this section apply to
Courts of Appeal, Reference and Revision.”

642. This section provides a mode for the rec-
tification of an error arising from noncompliance
with any of the provisions of section 164 or section
364. The object is to prevent justice being frustrated
by reason of such non-compliance. If any of the
provisions of this section have not been complied
with by a Magistrate, the document may be admitted
under this section upon taking evidence that the
statement recorded was duly made, if non-compli-
injured the accused to his defence on
the merit. If the record of the confession or the state-
ment is inadmissible owing to the failure to comply
with any of the provisions of section 164 or Section
364, intrinsic evidence notwithstanding anything in
section 91 of the Evidence Act may be given to
show that the accused person duly made the state.
ment and the statement, when so proved may be
admitted and used as evidence of the case, if non.
compliance has not injured the accused. The non.
compliance with the provisions is cured only when
there is no injury caused to the accused as to his
defence on merit. Similar views have been
expressed in Mohammad Ali vs Emperor, 35 Cel.)
385(FB) as follows:

“In view of the provisions of the sections
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, particularly
those contained in section 533, Criminal
Procedure Code, it is difficult to say that the
omission to record questions and answers is a
fatal defect, and that it is only by recording such
questions and answers that a confession can fur-
nish data which enable the Court to arrive at the
conclusion as to the voluntary nature of the con-
fession. It is equally difficult to hold that when
supplying these data or materials it would
always be “impossible” for the trial Court to
form an estimate as to the voluntary nature of
such confession. The defect no doubt is a gross
irregularity and it may in certain special cases
injure the accused in his defence on the merits,
but barring such cases such a defect is com-
pletely cured by the provisions of section 533 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is open to a
Court to come to a conclusion from the internal
evidence furnished by the statement itself or
from other evidence that the statement had been
voluntarily made, and the mere fact that there
was an omission to record questions and
answers would not debar the Court from com-
ing to that conclusion. Nor can it be said that
without these data or materials it is “impossi-
ble” for a Court to arrive at the conclusion that
the confession had been made voluntarily.
Where, of course, the defect is not merely one
of recording it in due form and in accordance
with law but there is a defect that the statement
was not duly made at all, the position would be
different.”


            
643. In the Kehar Singh case (AIR 1988 SC
183) a question arose about the defect in the pro-
cedure in recording the confession of Kehar Singh
BC Ray, J on consideration of Nazir Ahmed’s case
(AIR 1936 PC 253) and the provisions of section
533 observed as follows:

“On a consideration of the above decisions
it is manifest that if the provisions of section
164(2) which require that the Magistrate before
recording confession shall explain to the person
making confession that he is not bound to make
a confession and if he does so it may be used as
evidence against him and upon questioning the
person if the Magistrate has reasons to believe
that it is being made voluntarily then the con-
fession will be recorded by the Magistrate. The
compliance of the sub-section (2) of section 164
is therefore, mandatory and imperative and
non-compliance of it renders the confession
inadmissible in evidence. Section 463 (old sec-
tion 533 ) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
provides that where the questions and answers
regarding the confession have not been record-
ed evidence can be adduced to prove that in fact
the requirements of sub-section (2) of section
164 read with section 281 (old section 364)
have been complied with. If the Court comes to
a finding that such a compliance had in fact,
been made the mere omission to record the
same in the proper form will not render it inad-
missible evidence and the defect is cured under
section 463 but when there is noncompliance of
the mandatory requirement of section 164(2),
Criminal Procedure Code and it comes out in
evidence that no such explanation as envisaged
in the aforesaid sub-section has been given to
the accused by the Magistrate, this substantial
defect cannot be cured under section 463,
Criminal Procedure Code.”

644. Similar views have been expressed in
Nalini’s case (1999) 5 SCC 253.

“Even if there is an error committed by the
Magistrate while recording a statement of the
Confessing accused if it is mere an irregularity
and if such error or defect or non-compliance has
Not prejudiced the accused in taking his defence,

it is curable under section 533, CrPC and by this
irregularity under no stretch of imagination it can
be said that the accused is likely to be prejudiced
in his defence on the merits on account of such
omission and irregularity”.

645. What section 533 therefore, does is to
permit oral evidence to be given to prove that the
procedures laid down in section 164 had in fact been
followed when the Court finds that the record pro-
duced before it does not show that was so. If the oral
evidence established that the procedure had been
followed, then only can the record be admitted. The
section permits oral evidence to prove the procedure
had actually been followed for certain cases where
the record which ought to show that does not on the
face of it do so. In this case PWs 51 and 52 have
explained the defects and the confessing accused
have been able to cross-examine them on those
points. There is, therefore, hardly any grievance on
the part of the accused that they have been injured
by reason of such defects.

646. It appeared from the record, Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan retracted his
confession on Sth February, 1997 after 52 days of
his confession; Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman retracted his confession on Ist March, 1993
after 43 days of his confession and Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (artillery) also retracted
his confession after more than 30 days of his con-
fession. There is no explanation on the side of
defence about the delay in filing the applications for
retraction. Therefore, it can be inferred that these
petitions for retractions are after thought devices for
nullifying the admissions made in the statements.
Section 80 of the Evidence Act gives sanction to the
maxim, Omnia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse
acta, with regard to documents taken in course of a
judicial proceeding. It does not render admissible
any particular kinds of evidence, but only dispenses
with the necessity of formal proof in the case of cer-
tain documents taken in accordance with law. The
section applies to classes of documents,

(a) purporting to be the record of the evi-
dence of a witness given in a judicial proceeding and ,

            
 (b) purporting to be the record of the state-
ment or confession of a prisoner or an accused
person.

647. The essential requirements for raising
the presumption under section 80 of the Evidence
Act as to the genuineness of a document purporting
to be the confessional statement given by an accused
in a proceeding appear to be that the statement
should have been taken in accordance with law. The
Jaw relating to the mode in which the statement or
confession of an accused person has to be taken
down is contained in sections 164 and 364 of the
Code. The examination of an accused person includ-
ing every question put to him and every answer
given by him shall be recorded in full in the lan-
guage in which he is examined, or if that is not prac-
ticable, in the language of the Court or in English;
such record shall be shown or showed to him and, if
he does not understand the language in which it is
written, shall be interpreted to him in a language
which he understands. The record shall be signed by
the accused and the Magistrate. When such a docu-
ment is tendered in evidence and it is found that a
memorandum required by section 164(3) has been
given, a presumption arises under section 80 of the
Evidence Act that all the necessary formalities pur-
porting to have been performed and the documents
become admissible in evidence without further
proof.

648. The question is, whether in view of such
retraction, the confessions can be used against the
maker and as corroborative evidence against other
co-accused. In Joygun Bibi vs State 12 DLR (SC)
156, Abdul Majid made a confession implicating
him and Joygun Bibi about the murder of Abdus
Samad, husband of Joygun. The trial Court relying
upon it and the statement of one Zohura, maid ser-
vant of Joygun, both Abdul Majid and Joygun Bibi
were convicted. The High Court believed the con-
fession of Abdul Majid as voluntary which was cor-
roborated by circumstantial evidence, and main-
tained the conviction of Abdul Majid despite retrac-
tion. As regards Joygun Bibi, the High Court did not
consider the confession of co-accused Majid on the
ground that as the confession has been retracted, it
has practically no evidentiary value against Joygun
Bibi but maintained her conviction relying upon the

evidence of Johura and other circumstantial vie
dence on record. The Supreme Court of Pakistan did
not accept the proposition of law argued by the High
Court, It was said that retraction of a confession isa
circumstance which has no bearing whatsoey
upon the question whether in the first instance it wa,
voluntarily made, and on the further questio,
whether it is true. The fact that the maker of the con.
fession later does not adhere to it cannot by itsely
have any effect upon the findings reached as to
whether the confession was voluntary, and if so,
whether it was true, for to withdraw from a self.
accusing statement in direct face of the consequence
of the accusation, is explicable fully by the proxim-
ity of those consequences, and need have no con-
nection whatsoever with either its voluntary nature,
or the truth of the facts stated. The High Court was
perfectly right in first deciding these two questions,
and the answers being in the affirmative, in declar-
ing that the confession by itself was sufficient, taken
with the other facts and circumstances, to support
Abdul Majid’s conviction. Cornelius CJ speaking
for the Supreme Court argued as follows:

“The retraction of the confession was
wholly immaterial once it was found that it was
voluntary as well as true. That being the case,
no reason whatsoever can be found for the
inability felt by the learned Judges in taking the
confession into consideration against the co-
accused. It is true that if there were no other evi-
dence against Joygun Bibi except the confes-
sion of Abdul Majid, then, the confession by
itself being merely a matter to be taken into
consideration, and not having the quality of evi-
dence against Joygun Bibi, it could rightly be
held in law that her conviction could not be sus-
tained on the confession alone. The grounds for
this conclusion would undoubtedly gain weight
if the confession were also retracted. But in the
present case, Abdul Majid’s confession is by no
means the only material in the case to be taken
into consideration against Joygun Bibi. As will
be seen presently, the evidence of the maid-ser-
vant Zohur furnished a very complete and
detailed account of the movements and behav-
iour of Joygun Bibi on the night in question, and
particularly at and after the time of the murder.
Joygun Bibi has not offered any explanation in

            
answer to the questions put to her on the basis of
Zohura's ence and Abdul Majid’s confession
as to her behaviour that night. She has been con-
tent to repeat that she is innocent and to suggest
that the case has been fabricated against her by
her husband's younger brother, Sattar.”

649. Similar views have been expressed in
Mohd. Hussain Umar vs KS Dalipsinghhi, AIR 1970
SC 45, Ram Parkash vs State of Punjab AIR 1989
gC 1, and State vs Fazu Kazi alias Kazi Fazlur
Rahman 29 DLR (SC) 271. In Fazu Kazi’s case the
observations made in Joygun Bibi have been repro-
duced and thereby our Supreme Court followed the
statement of law argued therein.

650. In Ram Parkash’ case S Jafer Imam, J
spoke for the Supreme Court as under:

“It will be clear from the terms of this sec-
tion that where more persons than one are being
tried jointly for the same offence, a confession
made by any one of them affecting himself and
any one of his co-accused can be taken into
consideration by the Court not only against the
maker of the confession but also against his co-
accused. The Evidence Act nowhere provides
that if the confession is retracted, it cannot be
taken into consideration against the co-accused
or the confessing accused. Accordingly, the
provisions of the Evidence Act do not prevent
the Court from taking into consideration a
retracted confession against the confessing
accused and his co-accused. Not a single deci-
sion of any of the Courts in India was placed
before us to show that a retracted confession
was not admissible in evidence or that it was
irrelevant as against a co-accused.”

651. In Hussain Umar’s case, the Supreme
Court of India on following the dictum in Bhuboni
Sahu’s case (AIR 1949 PC 257) observed :

“At the trial he retracted the confession.
Under section 30 the Court can take into con-
sideration this retracted confession against
Mukherjee. But this confession can be used
only in support of other evidence and cannot be
made foundation of a conviction.”

652. In State vs Minhun alias Gul Hassan, \6
DLR (SC) 598 it has been observed that a retracted
confession can form the basis of conviction if the
confession is found voluntary. The observations are
thus :

“As for the confessions the High Coun, it
appears, was duly conscious of the fact that
retracted confessions, whether judicial or extra
judicial, could legally be taken into considera-
tion against the maker of those confessions
himself, and if the confessions were found to be
true and voluntary, then there was no need at all
to look for further corroboration. It is now well
settled that as against the maker himself his
confession, judicial or extra judicial, whether
retracted or not retracted, can in law validly
form the sole basis of his conviction, if the
Court is Satisfied and believes that it was true
and voluntary and was not obtained by torture
or coercion or inducement. The question, how-
ever, as to whether in the facts and circum-
stances of a given case the Court should act
upon such a confession alone is an entirely dif-
ferent question, which relates to the weight and
evidentiary value of the confession and not to
its admissibility in law.” .

653. A confession can be made foundation of
a conviction if it is recorded in accordance with law;
it is found true and voluntary; if it is inculpatory
in nature and if on examination of the statement as a
whole it is found in conformity on comparison with
the rest of the prosecution case. What amount of
corroboration could be necessary in a case would
always be a question of fact to be determined in the
light of the circumstances of each case. Sometimes
no corroborative evidence are available and the
Court can act upon the confession whether retracted
or not, against the maker, if the confession is found
to be true and voluntary and if it was not obtained by
torture, coercion or inducement. While considering
a confession against a co-accused whether the con-
fession is retracted or not, if such a confession is
found voluntary, such confession cannot be made
the foundation of a conviction and can only be used
in support of other evidence. The proper way to
approach a case of this kind is, first to marshall the
evidence against the accused excluding the confession


            
altogether from consideration and see whether,
if its believed, a conviction could be based on it, If
it is capable of belief independently, then of course,
it is not necessary to call the confession in aid.
Where the Court is not prepared to act on the other
evidence, in such an event the Judge may call in aid
the confession and use it to lend assurance to the
other evidence.

654. As observed above, the confession of
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan
was recorded in accordance with law and his state-
ment about his presence at the parade ground and
from there his presence at Serniabat’s house and
then at the Radio Station is corroborated by other
two confessional statements of Licutenant Colonel
Syed Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery). His statement as
regards his subsequent conduct has been corroborat-
ed by PWs 15, 37, 46 and 47. The confessional
statement of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman has been corroborated by the other two
confessional statements of Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan and Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery). PWs 1, 4,
11, 12, 15, 21,42 and 46 corroborated his statement
in material particulars, The confession of Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) is corroborat-
ed by other confessing accused in material particu-
lars, His statement has also been corroborated by
PWs 17, 18, 27 and 34. His statement as regards his
presence at the night parade has been corroborated
by PWs 11, 21, 22, 24, 25 , 29 and 35. These con-
fessing accused have also implicated Major AKM
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) and Major Bazlul Huda
in material particulars. There is no inconsistency
regarding participation of the appellants in the night
parade on 14th August and their diverse acts at dif-
ferent key points at or about the time of occurrence
in these confessions. There are also corroborative
evidence of PWs 1, 4, 5, 6, 12, 21 and 22 against
Bazlul Huda besides the co-accuseds’ confession
and PWs 4, 5, 7, 11, 12, 21 and 22 corroborated
about the complicity of Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed.

655. Now the next question is, whether these
confessions made by the accused appellants are
admissible in evidence against them and co-conspir-
ators to prove the charge of criminal Conspiracy
after the cessation of the conspiracy under Section
10 of the Evidence Act. Conspiracy means some.
thing more than the joint action of two or more per.
sons to commit an offence; if it were Otherwise,
Section 10 is intended to admit evidence of commi-
nications between different conspirators while the
conspiracy was going on, with reference to the car.
tying out of the conspiracy. This point has been
answered in Mirza Akbar vs King Emperor. Ajp
1940 (PC) 176. Their Lordships of the Privy
Council on consideration of different authorities ang
section 10 of the Evidence Act were of the view that
a statement made after the conspiracy has been ter.
minated on achieving its objects could not be used
as substantive evidence. It was observed as follows:

“This being the principle, their Lordships
think the words of section 10 must be construed
in accordance with it and are not capable of
being widely construed so as to include a state-
ment made by one conspirator in the absence of
the other with reference to past acts done in the
actual course of carrying out the conspiracy,
after it has been completed. The common inten-
tion is in the past. In their Lordships’ judgment,
the words “common intention” signifies a com-
mon intention existing at the time when the
thing was said, done or written by one of them,
Things said, done or written while the conspir-
acy was on foot are relevant as evidence of the
common intention, once reasonable ground has
been shown to believe in its existence. But it
would be a very different matter to hold that
any narrative or statement or confession made
to a Third party after the common intention or
conspiracy was no longer operating and had
ceased to exist is admissible against the other
party. There is then no common intention of the
conspirators to which the statement can have
reference. In their Lordships’ judgment sec-
tion10 embodies this principle. That is the con-
struction which has been rightly applied to sec-
tion!0 in decisions in India, for instance, in 59
Bom 839 and 38 Cal 169. In these cases the dis-
tinction was rightly drawn between communi-
cations between conspirators while the conspit-
acy was going on with reference to the carrying


            
out of conspiracy and statements made, after
arrest or after the conspiracy has ended, by way
of description of events then past.”

656. These views have been approved in
zulfigar Ali Bhutto vs State PLD 1979 SC 53, State
vs Nalini (1999) § SCC 283, Mohd Khalid vs State
of West Bengal (2002) 7 SCC 334, Sidharth and oth-
ers vs State of Bihar (2005) 12 SCC 545, and State
ys Navot Sandhu alias Afsan Guru (2005) 11 SCC
600. In Zulfigar Ali Bhutto's case, Anwarul Haq, CJ
speaking majority for the Supreme Court of
Pakistan after following all previous decisions of the
Sub-continent observed as under:

“The methodology employed in the actual
application of section 10 of the Evidence Act is
fully demonstrated in these cases to the effect
that its actual application follows and does not
precede the finding that there is reasonable
ground to believe that a conspiracy exists and
certain persons are conspirators. It merely
speaks of the use of evidence in the case, and
the section does not control the sequence in
which the evidence should be let in. It appears
that these are but only two phases in the exer-
cise of the application of section 10 of the Act,
and not two distinct and separate stages laying
down the order in which evidence is to be led.
In the initial phase and as a condition precedent
under this section, the Court has got to find
from evidence aliunde on the record that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that two or
more persons have conspired together to com-
mit an offence or an actionable wrong. After,
having passed this test, the next phase in the
exercise consists in the actual application of the
operative part of this section whereby anything
said, done or written by any one of such persons
in reference to their common intention, during
the continuance of the conspiracy, is treated as
@ relevant fact against each of the persons
believed to be so conspiring, as well for the pur-
pose of proving the existence of conspiracy as
for the purposes of showing that any such per-
Son was a party to it, In fact, this section deals
with the mode of evaluation and the use of the
evidence brought on the record. It does not pro-
vide that the proof of existence of the conspira-
cy must necessarily precede any proof of the
acts and declarations of the co-conspirators of
the accused for use against them.”

657. There is another line of views taken in
the Supreme Court of India. It is said normally a
conspirator’s connection with the conspiracy would
get snapped after he is nabbed by the police and kept
in their custody because he would thereby cease to
be agent of other conspirators. It may not be possi-
ble to lay down a proposition of law that one con-
spirator’s connection with the conspiracy would
necessarily be cut off with his arrest. Thus, the con-
fessional statement made by an accused after his
arrest, if admissible and reliable, can be used against
a confessor as substantive evidence under section 10
of the Evidence Act, but its use against the other
accused would be limited only for the purpose of
corroboration of other evidence.

658. In State of Maharashtra vs Damu (2000)
6 SCC 269 = AIR 2000 SC 1691 co-accused Balu
Jashi made a confessional statement wherein he had
implicated two other accused persons. The Supreme
Court used the confessional statement of co-accused
as corroborative evidence since the confessing
accused has said in reference to the common interest
of the conspirators. It has been observed as follows:

“In this case there can be no doubt, relying
on Ex. 88 that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that all the four accused have conspired
together to commit the offences of abduction
and murders of the children involved in this
case. So what these accused have spoken to
each other in reference to their common inten-
tion as could be gathered from Ex.88 can be
regarded as relevant facts falling within the
purview of section 10 of the Evidence Act. It is
not necessary that a witness should have
deposed to the fact so transpired between the
conspirators. A dialogue between them could be
proved through any other legally permitted
mode. When Ex.88 is legally proved and found
admissible in evidence, the same can be used to
ascertain what was said, done or written
between the conspirators. All the things report-
ed in that confession referring to what A-1

            
Damu Gopinath and A-3 Mukinda Thorat have
said and done in reference to the common inten-
tion of the conspirators are thus usable under
section 10 of the Evidence Act as against those
two accused as well, in the same manner in
which they are usable against A-4 Damu Joshi
himself.”

659. Similar views have been taken in
Baburao Bajiroa Patil vs State of Maharashtra,
(1971)3 SCC 432. It has been observed as follows:

“After having so held the confessional
statements of the co-accused, in our opinion,
could legitimately be taken into account by the
Court to receive assurance to its conclusion. In
regard to the appellant’s presence at Angar on
the moming of December 7, 1961 and in regard
to the request by Rangya, Shankar and Kalyan
to the appellant to help and protect them, the
confessional statements of the co-accused could
also be appropriately taken into consideration
as provided by section 30 of the Indian
Evidence Act. In a case of conspiracy in which
only circumstantial evidence is forthcoming,
when the broad-features are proved by trust-
worthy evidence connecting all the links of a
complete chain, then on isolated event the con-
fessional statements of the co-accused lending
assurance to the conclusions of the Court can be
considered as relevant material and the princi-
ple laid down in the case of Haricharan Kumri
(supra) would not vitiate the proceedings”.

660. These views have been approved in
Mogqbool Hossain vs State, 12 DLR (SC) 217. The
case against Mogqbool Hussain rested entirely on
what the other two accused were alleged to have
stated to Tahsilder at the time of offering the bribe
money to the Tahsilder for the purpose of mutating
his name in the register. At the trial those two
accused repudiated their alleged statements. The
question that arose was whether the statements of
two co-accuseds were available to the prosecution
against him by virtue of sections 10 and 30 of the
Evidence Act. It was held as follows:

"Section 10 of the Evidence Act declares
that where there is reasonable ground to believe

that two or more persons have conspired togeth.
er to commit an offence or an actionable wrong,
anything said, done or written by any one of
such persons in reference to their common
intention, after the time when such intention
was first entertained by any one of them, is 4
relevant fact as against cach of the persons
believed to be so conspiring, as well for the pur.
pose of proving the existence of the conspiracy
as for the purpose of showing that any such per-
son was a party to it. A plain reading of this sec-
tion makes it clear that apart from the act or
statement of the coconspirator, some primafacie
evidence must exist of the antecedent conspira-
cy in order to attract section 10. Such evidence
of a pre-existing conspiracy between the appel-
lant and the two Revenue Officer is conspicu-
ous by its absence in this case.”

661. With due respect, I am unable to endorse
the latter views for, once a reasonable ground exists
to believe that two or more persons have conspired
together to commit an offence, anything said, done
or written by one of the conspirators in reference to
the common intention after the common intention
was entertained, is relevant against the other, not
only for the purpose of proving existence of the con-
spiracy but also for proving that the other person
was a party to it.

662. There can be two objections to the
admissibility of evidence under section 10 of the
Evidence Act. Firstly, that the conspirator whose
evidence is sought to be admitted against the co-
conspirator is not confronted in Court by the co-con-
spirator, and secondly, the prosecution merely
proves the existence of reasonable ground to believe
that two or more persons have conspired to commit
an offence and that brings into operation the exis-
tence of agency relationship to implicate co-con-
spirator, A statement made after the conspiracy has
been terminated on achieving its object or it is aban-
doned or it is frustrated or the conspirator leaves the
conspiracy in between, is not admissible against the
co-conspirator. Fixing the period of conspiracy is
important as the provisions of section 10 of the
Evidence Act would apply only during the existence
of the conspiracy.


            
663. Whether a particular accused had ceased
to be a conspirator is a matter which can be det
on the facts and circumstances of the given
conspirator’s connection with the conspiracy would
get snapped after he is nabbed by the police because
he would thereafter cease to be the agent of the other conspirator, There are cases in which a conspirator would continue to confabulate with the other conspirators and persist with the conspiracy even after his arrest, and in such cases the confession can be used against the confessing accused along with other accused implicated in the confession. In this case the prosecution has not adduced evidence to show that after the arrest of the three confessing
accused, they continued to conspire with other con-
spirators remaining outside.

664. Extra Judicial Confession

Even if we disbelieve the confessional state-
ments as not voluntary, the prosecution has been
able to prove the extra-judicial confessions of four
appellants which can be taken into consideration as
legal evidence and their conviction can be main-
tained relying upon them. In this connection the
leamed Attorney-General has drawn our attention to
the statements of PWs 8 and 15. These statements
according to the learned Attorney-General may be
used as the basis of conviction since these state-
ments are reliable, trustworthy and beyond
reproach.

665. PW 8 was serving in the army in the rank
of Captain during the relevant time. As per order of
the commanding officers this witness along with
two other officers went to Bangabandhu’s house for
ascertaining the real position prevailing there.
Accordingly, he visited Bangabandhu’s residence on
15th August at about 8-45 AM. He stated that Major
Noor Chowdhury and Major Bazlul Huda received
them and thereupon Major Bazlul Huda took him
inside the house, and in course of conversation
Bazlul Huda replied to the queries made to him.

666, Major Bazlul Huda admitted to this wit-
ness that he killed Sheikh Kamal because he was
passing information about the incident outside. He
also admitted that they killed one security personnel
as he was altercating with them and thereafter, on
query about the cause for the killing of Sheikh
Naser, Major Huda remained silent. On further
query about the killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh

Mujibur Rahman, he replied that as the
Bangabandhu queried to him why they came there
and wanted to know the whereabouts of Shafiullah
and pushed him away they shot him. On further
query about the killing of womenfolk, Major Huda
replied that the situation went beyond their control
and that the sepoys killed them. This appellant did
not challenge the statement of this witness either
directly or indirectly about his admission of killing.
These are extrajudicial confessions of Major Bazlul
Huda in which he has admitted about his active par-
ticipation in the killing of Sheikh Kamal by gun shot
injury and then the killing of Bangabandhu. The evi-
dence of this witness remain uncontroverted. Apart
from the above statement of Bazlul Huda, PW 15
also proved the extrajudicial confession of
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman,
Lieutenant Col Khandaker Abdur Rashid,
Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid, Major
Bazlul Huda, Major AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer) and
other accused, the relevant portion of the statement.

667. PW 15 stated, in the Bangabhaban fe
noticed from the conversation of Major Syed
Faruque Rahman, Major Khondker Abdur Rashid,
Major Sultan Shahriar, Major Shariful Hoque
Dalim, Major Aziz Pasha, Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer), Major Bazlul Huda and others that they
killed Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman with
his family i.e. his wife, his three sons, the wives of
two sons, Sheikh Naser and Colenel Jamil and thay
they staggeringly disclosed that for the interest of
the country they killed them. They have not denied
those statements by cross-examining this witness or
by giving him any suggestion. Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid gave the suggestion to this
witness in an evasive manner but he also did not
directly challenge this statement of this witness,
These are uncontroverted statements and these
statements clearly suggest that those four appellants
and other co-accused are responsible for the killing.
Now, the question is, whether these statements can
be taken as extra judicial confession since they have
not communicated to this witness that they have
killed Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
his family members. Learned Counsels contend that
these statements cannot be considered at this belat-
ed stage since the Court’s below have not consid-
ered the same. These are uncontroverted reliable
evidence on record relating to the occurrence and |
find no cogent ground to discard them and decide
the case excluding them. The range of facts which
may be given in evidence having been defined in
part I of the Evidence Act, it proceeds in part II to
deal with the manner in which facts receivable in
evidence under part I may be given in evidence. It is
a fundamental rule that unless there is some pre-
sumption as to the existence of a fact, its existence
must be proved to the satisfaction of the Court.
Therefore, the party who wishes the Court to believe
the existence of a fact, must prove it. There are.
however, two exceptions-these are (1) a fact which
is admitted by the other party need not be proved.
and (2) facts of which the Court shall take judicial
notice, need not be proved. Here a fact which is rel-
evant for the determination of the charge relating to


            
the incident to which they have faced trial has been
admitted by the accused and thus there is no legal
par in considering these evidence,

668. The appellant Bazlul Huda has admitted
to PW § that he has shot to death Sheik Kamal and
Bangabandhu, The other appellants except
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin (Artillery) in
unequivocal terms have disclosed that they have
killed Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
other members of his family including Colenel
Jamil. It is also fact that these statements have not
been communicated to PW 15 but he has over heard
the same while they have been swaggering for their
heroic act of killing and change of the Government
at a time when the preparation for the oath taking
ceremony for the new Government at Bangabhaban
was progressing. These statements clearly disclosed
the killing of the President and other members of his
family and the persons involved in the killing.
Admissions and confessions are dealt with in sec-
tions 24-30 of the Evidence Act about its admissi-
bility. These are exceptions to the general rule of
evidence and they are placed in the category of “rel-
evant fact” since they are declarations against the
maker, the probative value of such admissions or
confessions do not depend upon its communication
to another and they can be admitted into evidence if
they are proved by a witness, A confessional solilo-
guy is an expression of conflict of emotion, a con-
scious effort to stifle the pricked conscience; or a
joyous perception for the act is a direct piece of evi-
dence. In this case the accused persons expressed
joyous perception for being the killers of the
President and the remaining members of his family.
They did not hide their act of killing and disclosed it
in the Bangabhaban where many dignitaries were
present on the occasion of oath taking ceremony of
the new President. In “A Treatise on the Law of
Evidence” by Taylor, the author argued the doctrine
of confession as follows: “What the accused has
been overheard muttering to himself, or saying to
his wife or to any other person in confidence, will be
receivable in evidence.”

669. WM Best in “The Principles of Law of
Evidence” discussed on the same point as follows:

“Words addressed to others, and writing,
are no doubt the most usual forms; but words
uttered in soliloquy seem equally receivable”.

670. Phipson on Evidence, 7th Edition stated
the following passage;

“A statement which the prisoner had heen
overheard muttering to himself, if otherwise
than in his sleep, is admissible against him, if
independently proved.”

671. From the above arguments of law of the
authors on Evidence, I find that a declaration, state-
ment or muttering of an accused if it discloses an
offence of guilt can be admitted in evidence against
him on proof by the person who heard it.

672. In Sahoo vs State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR
1966 SC 40 the convict Sahoo developed illicit inti-
macy with his daughter-in-law Sundar Patti (son’s
wife). There was quarrel between them on the pre-
vious night of the occurrence and Sundar Patti ran
away to the house of one Md Abdullah, a neighbour.
The convict brought her back and passed the night
with her in one room of their house. On the morning
of the date of occurrence Sundar Patti was found
with injuries in the room and the convict was not
found present. Sundar Patti was admitted to the hos-
pital in the afternoon and she died after 12/13 days.
The convict Sahoo was put on trial for the charge of
murder, The evidence produced by the prosecution
was an extrajudicial confession and circumstantial
evidence, The extrajudicial confession was proved
by 4 witnesses stating that on the fateful morning at
6-00 AM they saw that the convict was going out of
his house murmuring that “he had finished Sundar
Patti and thereby finished the daily quarrels.” The
question arose as to whether the mutterings of the
accused proved by four witnesses could be taken as
extra judicial confession. Subba Rao, J speaking for
the Supreme Court of India argued as under:

“But there is a clear distinction between the
admissibility of evidence and the weight to be
attached to it. A confessional soliloquy is a
direct piece of evidence. It may be an expres-
sion of conflict of emotion, a conscious effort to
stifle the pricked conscience; and argument to
find excuse or justification for his act; or a pen-
itent or remorseful act of exaggeration of his

            
 part in the crime. The tone may be soft and low;
the words may be confused; they may be capa-
ble of conflicting interpretations depending on
the witnesses, whether they are biased or hon-
est, intelligent or ignorant, imaginative or pro-
saic, as the case may be. Generally they are
mutterings of a confused mind. Before such
evidence can be accepted, it must be established
by cogent evidence what were the exact words
used by the accused. Even if so much was
established, prudence and justice demand that
such evidence cannot be made the sole ground
of conviction. It may be used only as a corrob-
orative piece of evidence.”

673. There is difference in the disclosure of
extra judicial confession by PWs 8 and 15.
Whatever admission made by Major Bazlul Huda to
PW § was direct in nature, and the other one made
by 9 accused was heard by PW 15 is indirect in
nature. The evidentiary values of both of them are
same. Major Bazlul Huda was confronted with his
confession made to PW 8 in course of his examina-
tion under section 342. Except Major
AKMMohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer), other three
appellants had been confronted with their statements
proved by PW 15 in course of their examination
under section 342 of the Code. They did not chal-
lenge the said statements by giving any suggestion
or by cross examining him. Thus the said statements
may be used against them as legal evidence. These
extra-judicial confessions may in law validly form
the sole basis of conviction if the Court believes
them as true and voluntary against Major Bazlul
Huda, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman, Major
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) and Lieutenant Colonel
Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan as observed in Minhun
Ali alias Gul Hassan’s case. The learned Judges of
the High Court Division have ignored these impor-
tant pieces of evidence while finding the appellants
guilty of the charges.

674, Mr Ajmalul Hossain, QC has referred the
case of State of UP vs MK Anthony, AIR 1985 SC 48
on this point of admissibility of extra judicial con-
fession. In that case the accused killed his wife and
two children, The accused was seen sitting in the
adjoining room and on seeing him one witness
asked him what has been found about the murder. In
reply the accused reclaimed to God to excuse him

that “he had committed mistake as he had murdereg
his wife and two children.” The learned Sessions
Judge reproduced the disclosure of the accused to
the witness as follows:

“Oh God, pardon me, I have done blunder
I have murdered my wife and children.”

675. Now the question is, whether this extra
judicial confession deposed by the witness can be
the sole basis for conviction of the accused. The
Supreme Court of India considered case of Sahog
(supra) and other decisions (AIR 1974 SC 1545,
(1975) 1 SCR 747, AIR 1975 SC 258, AIR 1966 SC
40 and AIR 1977 SC 2274) Desai, J and was of the
view that there is neither any rule nor of prudence
that evidence furnished by extra judicial confession
cannot be relied upon unless corroborated by some
other credible evidence. The Supreme Count
observed as follows:

“It thus appears that extra-judicial confes-
sion appears to have been treated as a weak
piece of evidence but there is no rule of law nor
tule of prudence that it cannot be acted upon
unless corroborated. If the evidence about
extra-judicial confession comes from the mouth
of witness/witnesses who appear to be unbi-
ased, not even remotely inimical to the accused,
and in respect of whom nothing is brought out
which may tend to indicate that he may have a
motive for attributing an untruthful statement to
the accused; the words spoken to by the witness
are clear, unambiguous and unmistakably con-
vey that the accused is the perpetrator of the
crime and nothing is omitted by the witness
which may militate against it, then after sub-
jecting the evidence of the witness to a rigorous
test, on the touchstone of credibility, if it passes
the test, the extra-judicial confession can be
accepted and can be the basis of a conviction. In
such a situation to go in search of corroboration
itself tends to cast a shadow of doubt over the
evidence, If the evidence of extra-judicial con-
fession is reliable, trustworthy and beyond
reproach the same can be relied upon and a con-
viction can be founded thereon.”

676. Therefore, I find that there is uniform
views of the Supreme Courts of Bangladesh and
India that if an extrajudicial confession is reliable

            
and the evidence of such confession comes from the
lips of a witness who is unbiased the same can be
relied upon and a conviction can be founded there-
on. In the case in hand I find that PWs 8 and 15 are
neutral witnesses and they have proved the admis-
sions of four appellants about their participation in
the camage. The defence failed to bring anything by
eross examining them to indicate that they have a
motive for attributing unbelievable statements to the
accused, rather they have not challenged their state-
ments. The statements disclosed by those witnesses
were clear and conveyed that the four appellants and
others were the perpetrators of murder. Their state-
ments are corroborated by other evidence on record.
These accused appellants can be convicted relying
upon these extra judicial confessions as well.

Charge of murder

677. Mr Abdullah-al-Mamun,  learned
Counsel appearing for the appellant Major Bazlul
Huda and Major AKM Mohiuddin (Lancer) argues
that there is no reliable evidence in support of the
prosecution story that these appellants have been
recognised by PWs 1 and 4 at the place of occur-
rence and that the allegation that Major Huda shot to
death Sheikh Kamal and Bangabandhu as alleged is
also based on contradictory evidence on record and
therefore, the learned Judges of the High Court
Division erred in law in maintaining his conviction
and sentence. The learned Counsel has taken us to
the evidence on record and argues that the prosecu-
tion has withheld vital witnesses such as, Sheikh
Yunus Ali, Colonel Moshiud Doula and Colonel
Mahmudul Hasan purposely as they would have
been unfavourable to the prosecution and therefore,
an adverse inference may be drawn against the pros-
ecution for, withholding those vital witnesses.
Learned Counsel further contends that the allegation
that Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) has taken
Bangabandhu down from the first floor is based on
no reliable evidence on record and that his recogni-
tion by the witnesses at the place of occurrence is
totally absurd and unbelievable story. In this con-
nection learned Counsel has drawn our attention to
the evidence of PWs 1, 4, 5,6,7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 22
and 42. Learned Counsel has tried to make out a
case that there are contradictory evidence on record
regarding the presence of Bazlul Huda and

Mohiuddin Ahmed at the place of occurrence but the
High Court Division has totally ignored this ‘aspect
of the matter. The learned Counsel has referred the
cases of Nurul Islam vs State , 43 DLR (AD) 6
Hazrat Khan @ Hazrat Ali vs State, 54 DLR 636,
Moslemuddin vs State, 38 DLR (AD) 311, Safdor Ali
vs Crown, 5 DLR (FC)107 and Moyezuddin vs State
31 DLR (AD) 37 in support of his contention.

678. Mr Khan Saifur Rahman, learned
Counsel appearing for the appellants Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) argues that
there is no evidence in support of the charge of mur-
der of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
others against them. Learned Counsel further argues
that PW 1 is not an eye-witness of the occurrence
and Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) is not an FIR named accused, whose
inclusion in the case is a product of concoction for
which he is entitled to get the benefit of doubt.
Learned Counsel submitted that the story of hoisting
the flag and playing bugle in the house of
Bangabandhu just immediate before the occurrence
as stated by the witnesses was not believable one
since PWs 1-3 stated that the assailants were already
in the house of Bangabandhu. There is no reliable
evidence on record, learned Counsel submits, about
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman’s pres-
ence in the house of Bangabandhu at the relevant
time. In this connection the learned Counsel has
drawn our attention to certain portions of the evi-
dence of PWs 14 and 23. Learned Counsel further
contended that in view of withholding of tank crews,
an adverse presumption may be drawn against the
prosecution that if they were produced they would
not have supported the prosecution case. Learned
Counsel further contended that in view of the evi-
dence as revealed from the lips of the prosecution
Witnesses that the real planner of the incident was
Jobaida Rashid, it was evident that the appellants
had no common intention or preconcert mind of
their being involved in the incident and therefore,
the conviction of the appellants under sections
302/34 was illegal. Learned Counsel further argued
that the presence of Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery) with cannon at Kalabagan play
ground had not been substantiated by adducing reli-
able evidence.

            
679. Mr Abdur Razaque Khan, learned
Counsel appearing for Licutenant Colonel Shahriar
Rashid Khan argued that there is no reliable evi-
dence about Shahriar Rashid's complicity in the
murder of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman
and other members of his family. Learned Counsel
submitted that the learned Judges of the High Court
Division erred in law in relying upon the testimony
of PW 14 about his presence at the night parade at
Balurghat in the absence of any other corroborating
evidence and thus, his conviction for the charge of
murder was illegal. Learned Counsel further con-
tends that if the evidence of PW 14 is disbelieved,
the only evidence against Shahriar Rashid is about
his presence at the Radio Station at about 6 AM on
15th August and this fact has no nexus with the mur-
der of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman since
he was reemployed with effect from 15th August,
1975, his presence at the Radio Station was a part of
his official duty which he had carried out as per
direction of his commanding officer. In view of the
above, the learned Counsel concluded that the
learned Judges of the High Court Division erred in
law in maintaining his conviction and sentence.

680. The common points canvassed by the
leamed Counsels are that the leamed Judges of the
High Court Division upon superficial consideration
of the evidence on record have confirmed the death
sentence of the appellants in failing to consider that
there is no legal evidence on record in support of the
charges. It was also contended that the appellants
attended the night parade as a part of their, routine
works and that their presence at the parade could not
be connected with the murder of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his family members.
According to the learned Counsels, the killing was
the consequence of a revolt of the army to overthrow.
the Government of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman in which, the appellants were not involved.
In that view of the matter, it is argued that the con-
viction of the appellants is based on conjectures and
surmises, and the learned Judges of the High Court
Division erred in law in maintaining their conviction
and sentence,

681. Before we deal with the contentions of
the learned Counsels, it will be necessary to keep in
view the limited scope in these appeals against the
judgments and orders of conviction and sentence as

rendered by the High Court Division as well as the
trial Court against the appellants. Artic! 103(3) of
the Constitution does not confer a right of appeal oy
any party from a judgment and order passed by the
High Court Division, it merely clothes this Court,
with discretionary power to scrutinise and go into,
evidence in special circumstances in order to satisfy,
itself that substantial and grave injustice has been
done to the accused. Though the expression “discre-
tionary” has not been used in this clause of the
Article as has been used in the corresponding Indian
provision, (Article 136) but in view of the powers
given to this Court to exercise the jurisdiction, if it
grants leave from the judgment, order or sentence
manifestly suggest that this power is discretionary
one. Article 103(3) is couched in the verbatim lan-
guage of Article 136 of the Constitution of India,
The Supreme Court of India in Hargun Sundar Das
vs State of Maharastha, AIR 1970 SC 1514, consid-
ered the scope of its jurisdiction to assess the evi-
dence in an appeal against conviction, and observed
as follows:

“We may appropriately repeat what has
been pointed out by this Court under Article
136 of the Constitution, this Court does not nor-
mally proceed to review the evidence in crimi-
nal cases unless trial is vitiated by some illegal-
ity or material irregularity of procedure or the
trial is held in violation of rules of natural jus-
tice resulting in unfairness to the accused or the
judgment or order under appeal has resulted in
grave miscarriage of justice. This article
reserves to this Court a special discretionary
power to interfere in suitable cases when for
special reasons it considers that interference is
called for in the larger interest of justice.

682. Similar views have been expressed in the
cases of Metro vs State of UP AIR 1971 SC 1050.
Subeder vs State of UP AIR 1971 SC 125, and Ram
Sanjiwan Singh vs State of Bihar, AIR 1996 SC
3265.

683. The appellants have not raised in these
appeals as to whether the trial of the appellants have
been vitiated by some illegality or that it has been
held in violation of the rules of natural justice or that
by reason of misreading of the evidence a grave mis-
carriage has resulted in maintaining the conviction

            
py the High Court Division. Despite that we have
afforded the learned Counsels to argue the appeals
on the basis of the evidence on record taking into
consideration that the appellants have been sen-
tenced to death for ends of justice, In support of the
charges leveled against the appellant Major Bazlul
Huda, the prosecution has examined A.F.M.Mohitul
Islam (PW 1), Habilder (Retd) Md Quddus Sikder
(pw 4), Nk.Subedar (Retd) Abdul Gani (PW 5),
Habilder Ganner (Retd) Sohrab Ali (PW 6), ALD
Sirajul Hug (PW 12), Lieutenant Naik Abdul Khalek
(PW 21), Habilder Abdul Aziz (PW 22). The learned
Judges of the High Court Division have exhaustive-
ly discussed their evidence on record. I would refer
only the glimpses of their statements.

684. PW 1 is the informant and claimed as an
eye-witness, He was the resident PA of Banga-
bandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman deputed at house
No. 677 of Road No, 32, Dhanmondi during the rel-
evant time where the President was staying. He stat-
ed that on the day of occurrence at about 4-30/5-00
AM, he woke up on the call of the telephone mecha-
nic Abdul Matin that the President wanted to talk
with him over telephone. Soon thereafter he took the
receiver when the President directed him to connect
the Police Control Room stating that the miscreants
attacked Serniabat’s house. He failed to connect the
police control room as well as the Ganabhaban. In
the meantime Bangabandhu came down into the
office room and wanted to talk himself by taking the
receiver from him. At that time showers of bullet hit
the wall of the room breaking the window glass
asunder. They have lain down beside the table.
There was a break of firing when Sheikh Kamal got
down and stood on the verandah. The security staff
accompanied him and at that time 3/4 army person-
nel in khaki and black dress with arms in their hands
stood in front of them, the appellant Major Bazlul
Huda shot on the leg of Sheikh Kamal, who rolled
down beside his leg when he told PW | to make the
assailant known that he was the son of Sheikh
Mujib. PW 1 told the assailant about the identity of
Sheikh Kamal and soon thereafter, he brush fired
aiming Sheikh Kamal. One bullet hit his leg and
another hit PW 50’s leg, Sheikh Kamal died on the
Spot. At one stage PW 50 wanted to take out PW 1
and Sheikh Kamal through the back side door and
when they came nearer to the door, Major Bazlul

Huda pulled him back by catching his hair. There
were other armed army personnel with him. Major
Bazlul Huda lined up PW 1 and others in front of the
main gate. Some time thereafter he heard shouting
noise of Bangabandhu and indiscriminate firing and
screaming of women, He also narrated how Sheikh
Naser was shot to death and the uttering of Bazlul
Huda on query made by Major Faruque that “all are
finished”, On hearing the uttering of Bazlul Huda,
he understood that the President and his family
members were brutally killed. This witness made
positive statement that Major Bazlul Huda shot
Sheikh Kamal to death on the spot. The defence did
not challenge his statement in course of cross-exam-
ination and therefore, his statement that the appel-
lant shot to death Sheikh Kamal remains uncontro-
verted.

685. PW 4 is another eye-witness and an army
jawan posted in the field artillery regiment during
the relevant time, and he was deputed as security
staff of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman along with some
other army personnel of his company. He stated that
Captain Bazlul Huda and 3 other army personnel
were also in the field artillery unit, that on 15th
August, 1975 at about 5-00 AM he along with other
security staff noticed that Subedar Major Abdul
Wahab Joarder was getting down from the jeep in
front of the house on Road No.31 where he along
with other security personnel were staying using it
as temporary barrack for guarding the President's
house. Thereafter he along with other guards came
to Bangabandhu’s house and after reaching there
they hoisted flag upon playing bugle. At that time he
noticed indiscriminate firing towards Bangaban-
dhu’s house from the southern side of the lake. At
that time black and khaki dressed army personnel
entered into the house by shouting ‘hands up’, of
them, he identified Captain Bazlul Huda, Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer) and another who were then at
the gate. Kamal was standing on the verandah, and
on seeing him Captain Bazlul Huda shot at him with
stengun in his hands. Sheikh Kamal fell down inside
the reception room. Captain Bazlul Huda again shot
at Kamal and killed him. Thereafter Major Mohi-
uddin (Lancer) with his force proceeded towards the
first floor by opening fire, Thereafter Bazlul Huda
and Noor with their force followed him, As per their
direction, they also followed them. He saw that


            
Major Mohiuddin and his force were taking Ban-
gabandhu down to the ground floor. At that time
Bangabandhu queried them what they were intend-
ing to do and soon thereafter, Huda and Noor shot at
Bangabandhu with their stenguns, who died on the
spot. The statement of this witness that he saw
Bazlul Huda and Mohiuddin (Lancer) at the gate,
that Bazlul Huda, Major Noor and his force
approached towards the first floor and that Huda and
Noor shot at Bangabandhu on the stair had not been
denied by Captain Bazlul Huda in course of cross-
examination or by giving suggestion to him. The
incriminating part of the statement of this witness
remains uncontroverted. Appellant Major Mohi-
uddin also did not challenge the testimony of this
witness as regards his recognition at the gate of
Bangabandhu’s house and the statement of this wit-
ness that he saw Mohiuddin and his force bringing
Bangabandhu down to the ground floor. PW 5 was
also jawan of artillery unit and he was deputed at
Bangabandhu’s house as security guard. He was pre-
sent at Bangabandhu’s house at the time of occur-
rence at about 5-00 AM He stated that after hoisting
the flag he noticed indiscriminate firing towards the
Bangabandhu’s house, when he took shelter in the
guard room, that 5/7 minutes thereafter the firing
was stopped and at that time, he saw Captain Bazlul
Huda, Major Noor and other jawans in khaki and
black dress got down from a vehicle in front of
Bangabandhu’s house, that Bazlul Huda queried to
him and then he talked with another over wireless,
that soon thereafter Mohiuddin (Lancer) and his
force came from eastern side by saying ‘hands up’
and entered into Bangabandhu’s house by opening
fire and that he along with other guards was kept
confined in the guard room. The defence did not
challenge his statement that he recognised Captain
Bazlul Huda and Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) while
they were entering into Bangabandhu’s house by fir-
ing at the time of occurrence.

686. PW 6 was also a member of the security
team deputed at Bangabandhu’s house. He is anoth-
er eye-witness of the occurrence. He stated that on
15th August at about 4-30 AM Habilder Gani made
all the security staff to fall-in in front of guard room
and some time thereafter 2/3 trucks with force in
black dress stopped towards the western side of
Bangabandhu’s house , and there was firing towards

andhu’s house from the lake side. In corrop-
oration with the testimonies of PWs | and 4, he stay.
ed that when Kamal called the security team to fo}.
low him, Captain Bazlul Huda, another officer of
Lancer unit with black dress, and some jawans of
artillery unit entered into Bangabandhu’s house
Soon thereafter Captain Huda and another shot ay
Sheikh Kamal who rolled down inside the receptioy,
room on sustaining gun shot injury. Captain Huda
again shot at him. Thereafter Captain Huda ang
another officer proceeded towards the first floor,
Some time thereafter he heard sounds of firing and
screaming of women. Bazlul Huda did not challenge
the incriminating part of the statement of this wit-
ness and therefore, the statement that PW 6 saw
Bazlul Huda while he shot to death Sheikh Kamal
remain uncontroverted.

687. PW 11 attended the night parade on 14th
August which was arranged in front of his store. He
identified Captain Huda, Major AKM Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and Major Faruque Rahman there. He stat-

ed that at about 4-00 AM the troops on a vehicle
approached towards the house of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and they were asked to get
down from the vehicle about 80 yards west of Ban-
gabandhu’s residence at about 4-30 AM, when
Resalder Sarwar told him to follow the order of
Major Mohiuddin. Major Mohiuddin directed them
not to allow movement of people in front of the
house of Bangabandhu and to disarm the police on
duty. He heard sounds of firing inside the house of
Bangabandhu and then heard the order saying
‘hands up’, that Resalder Sarwar directed him not to
allow anybody to enter into Bangabandhu’s house
and at that time Major Mohiuddin , Major Noor,
Captain Bazlul Huda and others entered into
Bangabandhu’s house, that he heard sounds of firing
from the house of Bangabandhu and screaming of
women, that Major Mohiuddin, Major Noor, Cap-
tain Bazlul Huda came out and at that time Noor
directed Subedar Major to go inside and to ascertain
whether all were finished, that Captain Huda direct-
ed him through Sarwar to disperse the persons
standing beside the lake, that thereafter he heard the
sound of movement of tanks and one tank came in
front of Bangabandhu’s house, that Major Faruque
got down from the tank when Major Mohiuddin,
Major Noor, Captain Huda and others came nearer

            
to him and talked with him for some time, and there-
after Major Faruque left with the tank, This state-
ment of this witness about the complicity of the
appellant Bazlul Huda in the incident has not been
challenged directly or indirectly, Therefore, this
statement remains uncontroverted.

688, During the relevant time PW 12 was ser-
ving in the First Bengal Lancer unit in which Major
Faraque Rahman was their commanding officer. He
also stated that in the parade ground he saw the
appellant Bazlul Huda and other accused persons
including Syed Faruque Rahman and Major Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Lancer), He further stated that in the
second phase of parade which started after 3-30 AM,
he found the appellant Bazlul Huda along with other
officers including Syed Faruque Rahman, Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer), Major Faruque Rahman intro-
duced Major Dalim, Captain Bazlul Huda and
another to them. Thereafter Major Faruque directed
them to bring ammunition from the kote. As per
direction, they brought ammunition and came to the
parade ground. Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) directed
them to board into the vehicle. The army personnel
boarded on 3 trucks and the others boarded on
another truck. At about 4-30 AM they approached
via Balurghat Cantonment-Rail crossing Farm Gate
and from Farm Gate they approached towards
Dhanmondi Road No.32 through the Mirpur Road
and at the meeting point of Road No.32, Mohiuddin
(Lancer) directed them to get down from the truck
and thereafter he briefed them not to be frightened
on hearing sounds of firing as they were theirs’ and
Major Dalim’s people and that he directed them not
to allow anybody to enter into Road No.32. There-
afier he narrated the other incidents that happened
after killing of the President and the members of his
family. The appellant did not challenge the incrimi-
nating part of the evidence in chief of this witness as
regards his recognition of Bazlul Huda, Mohiuddin
(Lancer), Dalim and Faruque at the parade ground
and the marching of the troops towards the house of
the then President.

689. PW 21 was deployed in the Two Field
Artillery of Papa Battery during the relevant time.
He stated that he attended the night parade and
thereafter he along with other soldiers was kept
towards the southern side of Airport runway, At

about 2-00 AM their commending officer Major
Khondker Abdur Rashid along with Major Mohi-
uddin, (Lancer), Captain Bazlul Huda and other
officers came there. Major Khondker Abdur Rashid
told them to make themselves prepared with arms
and ammunition as they would be taken to an emer-
gency duty. At about 4-30 AM their truck came to
road No. 32 and directed them to get down from the
truck. The commanding officer directed them not to
allow anybody to move through the road No.32. He
stated that after Azan he heard sounds of firing
towards the eastern side and thereafter he came to
know that the appellant and other accused persons
killed Bangabandhu and the members of his family.

690. PW 22 was a sepoy of Two Field Artil-
lery during the relevant time. He stated that he was
present at the night parade on 14th night till 12 at
night. At about 2-30 AM the commanding officer
Khondker Abdur Rashid along with the appellant
Bazlul Huda and some other officers came there.
Major Rashid told them to get ready for special duty
and if necessary they were required to open fire. He
corroborated the testimony of PW 21 about their
coming to road No.32 from the nigh parade with
arms and his recognition of the appellant. The appel-
lant declined to cross examine him.

691. On an analysis of the evidence, I find
that the prosecution has been able to prove by unim-
peachable evidence about the presence of the appel-
lant at the night parade on the 14th August and from
there the appellant along with co-accused came to
the place of occurrence, that he shot to death Sheikh
Kamal and Bangabandhu and that he was seen while
he was approaching towards the first floor of Banga-
bandhu’s house where upon the other inmates of the
Bangabandhu’s house were brutally killed.

692, In respect of the appellant Major AKM
Mohiuddin (Lancer), the prosecution has examined
PWs 4, 5, 7, 11,12, 21, 22 to prove the charge lev-
eled against him. PW 4 stated that he recognised this
appellant along with appellant Bazlul Huda at the
gate of Bangabandhu’s house. He also stated that
this appellant along with the force of his unit pro-
ceeded towards the first floor of Bangabandhu’s
house by firing and thereafter they brought Ban;
bandhu down and when they were on the stair
Captain Bazlul Huda and Major Noor shot him to


            
death. He further stated that after killing of
Bangabandhu this appellant and others got down
and left towards south, In course of cross-examina-
tion, this appellant did not challenge the statements
of PW 4 regarding the incriminating part of his
involvement in the incident and therefore, the evi-
dence that the appellant along with his force entered
into the house of Bangabandhu by firing and
brought Bangabandhu down on the point of arms for
facilitating the killing remain uncontroverted.

693. PW 5 corroborated the statement of PW
4 that this appellant along with his force entered into
the house by firing. The appellant has not chal-
lenged the testimony of this witness in that regard,
Therefore, the identification of the appellant at the
place of occurrence and his direct participation in
the carnage deposed by this witness remain uncon-
troverted.

694. PW 11 had identified this appellant at the
parade. He saw two persons in civilian dress who
came out of this appellant’s office at about 12 at night
on 14th August and at that time, the appellant called
Huda to come towards him. He also stated that this
appellant arranged army dress for those two persons
who were in civil dress. While discussing the evi-
dence of this witness about the complicity of Huda, I
discussed the complicity of this appellant as well.

695. PW 12 also identified this appellant at
the parade ground on 14th August. He stated that
this appellant directed the army personnel who were
at the parade to board into the vehicle, that at about
4-30 AM they came to the meeting point of Dhan-
mondi Road No.32 by six trucks via Balurghat
Cantonment-Rail crossing-Mohakhali Road and
Farmgate, that he was with the appellant in the same
truck, that this appellant directed all of them to get
down from the truck at the meeting point of Road
No.32 and then he briefed them that they should not
be frightened on hearing the sounds of firing as
theirs’ and those of Major Dalim’s persons were
inside and thereafter, this appellant along with some
force entered into Road No.32. In course of cross-
examination, this appellant did not challenge the
incriminating part of his complicity and that he
entered into Road No,32 with his force just immedi-
ate before the occurrence. | have narrated his evi-
dence while considering the complicity of appellant

Bazlul Huda and therefore, in order to avoid Tepeti-
tion, | have refrained from reiterating his evidence,
In cross-examination, this witness has reconfirmed
his statement in chief about this appellant’s presence
at the parade ground and his entering through the
Road No.32 with his force just immediate prior to
the occurrence.

696. PW 22 made statements in corroboration
with the statements of PW 21, whose evidence hag
been discussed while considering the complicity of
Major Bazlul Huda. He further stated that he along
with PW 21 and other army personnel were dropped
at Road No.32 by the side of a canal, that the com.
mander directed them to see that no outsider entered
into Road No.32, that thereafter he heard sounds of
firing and that he along with Naik Nazrul, Sepoy
Khalek and others proceeded towards east and there
he found army personnel of Artillery unit and Lan-
cer unit were standing in front of a house and on
query he came to know that the house belonged to
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. Thereafter
he along with the guards, commander Nazrul, Kha-
lek and others entered into the house of Banga-
bandhu and saw the dead bodies and on coming out
of the house after talking with the army personnel
standing at the gate , he learnt that Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and other officers killed Bangabandhu and
his family members. This appellant did not chal-
lenge incriminating part of the evidence of this wit-
ness in course of cross-examination.

697. Therefore, his evidence remain uncon-
troverted.

698. In respect of Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman, the prosecution examined PWs 1, 4, 11
and 12 to prove the charge against him. PW | stated
that at the time of occurrence he saw Major Faruque
Rahman at the gate of Bangabandhu’s house and on
his query, Major Bazlul Huda told him that “all are
finished.” The recognition of the appellant by this
witness has not been challenged in course of cross-
examination.

699, PW 4 stated that at or about the time of
occurrence, Major Faruque came in front of Banga-
bandhu’s main gate with a tank and at that time
Major Noor, Major Aziz Pasha, Major Mohiuddin,
Captain Bazlul Huda and others came there and

            
talked with him for some time. He identified Major
Faruque in the dock. He further stated that some
time thereafter Major Faruque called Captain Bazlul
Huda and Subedar Major Abdul Wahab and decorat-
ed Captain Bazlul Huda with a badge of Major and
Subedar, Abdul Wahab Joarder with a badge of
Lieutenant and then he addressed them as Major
Huda and Lieutenant Joarder respectively. The pres-
ence of this appellant at the gate of Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's house at or about the
time of occurrence as deposed by the witness has
not been denied by him.

700. PW 11 deposed that in the night parade
on 14th August 1975 he saw Two IC Major Faruque
and at that time Resalder Moslehuddin saluted him.
This witness then narrated about the marching of the
troops towards the house of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman. He then narrated the incident
vividly. He further stated that Major Faruque came
with a tank at the gate of Bangabandhu’s house
when Major Mohiuddin, Major Noor, Captain Huda,
Resalder Sarwar and other army personnel of
Artillery unit came nearer to him, that they talked
with him for some time and thereafter Major
Faruque left with the tank. He identified Major
Faruque in the dock. He did not challenge the state-
ments made by this witness about his identification
in the parade ground and at the gate of Banga-
bandhu’s house with tank at or about the time of
occurrence.

701. PW 12 made statements in corroboration
with PW 11 and stated that he saw Major Faruque
Rahman and other accused persons at the parade on
14th August night. He further stated that Major
Faruque Rahman inspected the parade and directed
to follow RDM night class. Thereafter this witness
narrated about marching of the troops towards the
Road No.32 from the parade ground. He also narrat-
ed the manner of hearing sounds of firing after
reaching to the place of occurrence, He further stat-
ed he saw the appellant with a tank at about 7-14
AM while he came to Mirpur road from road No.32.
As regards the appellant Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan, the prosecution has exam-
ined PW 14 who proved his presence at the night
parade at Balurghat. PW 14 stated that he was pres-

ent at the night parade on 14th August at Balurghat
which ended at 2-00/2-30 AM, that at that time they
were directed to fall-in, that after coming to the
parade ground he saw Major Faruque, Major Mohi-
uddin and other accused persons and two other per-
sons in civil dress. Along with them, he also saw
Major Rashid with some officers of Artillery unit.
Major Faruque directed them to mark fall-in and
reminded them that they were made to fall-in for
executing an important task, that thereafter he intro-
duced two persons in civil dress as Major Dalim and
the other as Major Shahriar, this appellant, that he
told that they would work with them and that the
troops were required to obey their directions. There-
after, he narrated about the movement of the tanks
and the other incidents. The defence did not chal-
lenge the statement of this witness that this appellant
came at the night parade at Balurghat at 2- 2-30 in
civil dress or that Major Faruque introduced the
Jawans while on fall-in condition about the identity
of the appellant. The evidence of this witness so far
as it relates to the incriminating portion about his
participation in the night parade and his identifica-
tion remain uncontroverted. Admittedly this appel-
lant was a dismissed/released officer from the army
and he was not supposed to remain present at the
army’s night parade at mid night on 14th August
1975. The learned Counsel contended that there is
no corroborating evidence of PW 14 that he was pre-
sent at Balurghat. Not only that he did not deny the
statements of PW 14 about his presence at Balur-
ghat, he also did not give any explanation in his
written explanation in reply to his examination
under section 342 of the Code despite the fact that
he was confronted with the statement of PW 14. PW.
24 also corroborated PW 14 about this appellant’s
identification at the night parade on 14th August.
Besides the statements of PWs14 and 24, he also
admitted about his presence in the night parade in
his confessional statement over which I discussed
earlier. He also admitted in his extra judicial confes-
sion about his complicity in the murder. His subse-
quent conduct proved by PWs 20, 37, 42, 46, 47
over which I would discuss later on, which can be
used as corroborating evidence, sufficiently proved
his involvement in the occurrence. There is no rule
of law that the uncorroborated testimony of one wit-

            
ness cannot be accepted, As a general rule, a Court
may act on the testimony of a single witness, though
uncorroborated, Unless corroboration is insisted
upon by statute the Court should not insist on cor-
roboration, except in eases where the nature of the
testimony of the single witness itself requires that
corroboration should be insisted upon, and that the
question, whether corroboration of the testimony of a
single witness was or was not necessary, must depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.

702. In respect of Lieutenant Colonel Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Artillery), the prosecution has exam-
ined PWs 17, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32, 34 and
35 in support of the charge leveled against him. PW
17 was a Nayek of Two Field Artillery regiment at
the relevant time in which the appellant was a com-
mander of Papa Battery. He deposed regarding the
presence of the appellant at the night parade at
Balurghat on 14th August 1975. This witness has
narrated about the parade in detail. This witness stat-
ed that after the parade Major Mohiuddin stood
behind the Papa Battery cannon and gave some
directions by calling Subedor Hashem. Thereupon
Hashem called the Jawans and reminded them about
the direction and then he directed them to board on
the truck and called 4/5 gunners including this wit-
ness from the Quebec Battery and thereafter Has-
hem hooked 6 cannons to trucks after examining
them and thereafter the trucks loaded with cannons
started moving around 3-30/4-00 AM He was with
Major Mohiuddin in the same vehicle. The trucks
reached Kalabagan area at 4-00 AM and as per
direction of Major Mohiuddin, the cannons were set
up aiming Bangabandhu’s house at Road No.32 and
Rakshibahini headquarter. He further stated that as
per order of Major Mohiuddin, they fired 4 rounds
of cannon-balls and some time thereafter, when the
morning light was visible as per order of Major
Mohiuddin they closed the cannons and hooked
with the truck and then they returned to their bar-
rack. This appellant did not challenge the statement
of this witness (ating to the incriminating portion
in course of cross-examination.

703. PW 18 is another army personnel of Two
Field Artillery regiment. He stated that Major Mohi-
uddin (Artillery) was their battery commander, He
narrated about the parade on 14th August night, in

Which, this appellant and other accused persons
were present, He further stated that the night train.
ing continued till 12-30 to 1-00 AM and this appe|-
lant inspected the parade. He made statements cor.
roborating with PW 17 and stated that at about 3.
30/4-00 AM, Abul Kalam made them to fall-in ang
at that time Captain Jahangir and Major Mohiuddin,
came there, Captain Jahangir told them that they have to perform an important task of checking Rakshjbahini and directed them to board into the vehicle, He then narrated about the approaching of their vehicle towards Dhanmondi, when he heard 4
rounds of firing and some time thereafter, Major
Mohiuddin told them to assemble the cannons and
as per his direction, they proceeded towards Gana-
bhaban. After reaching Ganabhaban Major Mohi-
uddin got down from the vehicle and after one hour
he came back and directed them to go to the Radio
Station via New Market.

704. PW 21 was a sepoy of Two Field Artil-
lery Papa Battery. He stated that Major Mohiuddin
(artillery) was commander of Papa Battery. He nar-
rated about the night parade in which Major Mohi-
uddin and other accused persons were present. He
further stated that at about 4-00/4-30 AM their truck
with arms approached towards Road No.32 and after
stopping at Road No.32, some of the army person-
nel were asked to get down from the vehicle and
directed them not to allow anybody to move through
the Road No.32. The defence did not challenge the
statements of this witness in any manner.

705. PWs 22, 24 and 25 narrated about the
night parade on 14th August of Two Field Artillery
unit of Papa Battery at the airport area in which they
stated that their commander Mohiuddin (Artillery)
was present. This statement has not been denied by
this appellant. PW 25 further stated that after the
parade Major Faruque Rahman briefed them.

706. PW 27 was also a sepoy of Two Field
Artillery of Papa Battery under Major Mohiuddin
(Artillery) during the relevant time. He also narrat-
ed about the night parade on 14th August as per
direction of Major Mohiuddin and thereafter as per
his order, he boarded on a vehicle and that the vehi-
cle came to Balurghat, when Major Mohiuddin told
them that Rakhibahini might attack army. Thereafter
he saw a cannon was hooked with a vehicle. The

            
other vehicles were also hooked with cannons and
thereafter they approached towards the bagan
via Mohakhali-Farmgate-Green  Road-Elephant
Road, Some of them were directed to get down from
the vehicle near Kala anand Major Mohiuddin
told them not to allow anybody to move on the road.
He further stated that when the sun rose one army
vehicle took them to Ganabhaban and there he heard
the voice of Major Dalim over radio that Banga-
bandhu was killed. This appellant did not challenge
the testimony of this witness regarding the incrimi-
nating part of his complicity in the incident,

707. PW 29 was another sepoy of Two Field
Artillery Papa Battery unit. He also stated that
Major Mohiuddin (Artillery) was the commander of
Papa Battery. He also narrated about the night
parade and stated that at about 3-30 AM the parade
was closed and thereafter they were taken to Balur-
ghat and found that the army personnel were loading
arms in the vehicles. They were directed to load
arms and thereafter they started towards the town.

708. PW 32 stated that he was a sepoy of Two
Field Artillery under the command of Major Mohi-
uddin (Artillery) and that he attended the parade on
14th night. He further stated that their unit was made
to fall-in when this appellant and other officers were
present. He further stated that they were made to
fall-in for the second time at 3-00/3-30 AM when
Major Rashid and other accused were present, that
as per order of Major Rashid they boarded into the
truck and at that time Naik Shamsul Islam gave him
ammunition. He further stated that their truck start-
ed before Fazar Azan and when they reached by the
side of Tejgaon Airport, Lieutenant Hasan directed
them not to allow movement of any vehicle on the
toad. He further stated that thereafter he came to
know that Major Mohiuddin and other co-accused
were involved in the incident. The appellant did not
challenge the statement of this witness in any man-
her,

709. PW 34 stated that he was Subedor of
Two Field Artillery of Papa Battery in which Major
Mohiuddin (Artillery) was the commander. He stat-
ed that on 14th night training he was present and that
their unit moved with six guns to new airport via
Chairman Bari and at about 10-00 PM he heard
sounds of Major Mohiuddin’s gun firing near the

gun ai He further stated that at about 2-30 AM
they were made to fall-in again and thereafter they
boarded in a vehicle and proceeded towards the
Science Laboratory via Mohakhali and from 1
their vehicle turned towards northern side and
approached through the Mirpur Road and thereafter,
the vehicle stopped in front of a lake and at that time
Major Mohiuddin was standing behind the gun. The
troops were directed not to allow anybody to move
on the road. The defence did not challenge the state-
ment of this witness.

710. PW 35 made statements in corroboration
with PW 34 and claimed that he was Subedor Major
of Two Field Artillery of Papa Battery, in which
Major Mohiuddin (artillery) was commander. He
also narrated regarding the night training on 14th
August and stated that Captain Jahangir handed over
the parade to Major Mohiuddin. He further stated
that after the incident he queried to the force about
the cause for killing Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
came to know that Major Mohiuddin and other
accused persons were involved in the killing of Ban-
gabandhu and his family members. The defence did
not challenge the statement of this witness.

711. Onan analysis of the evidence on record
it is seen that there are uncontroverted evidence on
record against the appellant Major Bazlul Huda’s
shooting to death of Sheikh Kamal and Bangaban-
dhu on 15th August. PWs 1, 4 and 6 are the eye-wit-
ness of the occurrence and they have stated that
Major Bazlul Huda shot to death Sheik Kamal. PW.
4 further stated that Major Bazlul Huda along with
Major Noor shot to death Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman. PWs 5 and 7 also recognised him
at the time of occurrence at Bangabandhu’s house
besides these three witnesses. This appellant was
also seen by PWs 11, 21 and 22, at the night parade,
wherefrom he along with others came to Banga-
bandhu’s house and killed Sheikh Kamal and
Bangabandhu. Therefore, I find that there are uncon-
troverted evidence against this appellant of shooting
to death of Sheikh Kamal and Bangabandhu on 15th
August, 1975, PWs 8 and 15 also proved his extra
judicial confessions regarding his complicity in the
occurrence of killing. The leaned Judges of the
High Court are therefore, perfectly justitied in find-
ing him guilty of the charge of murder.

            
712. As regards Lieutenant Col Syed Faruque
Rahman, PWs 11 and 12 recognised him at the night
parade wherefrom he along with his force marched
towards Dhanmondi and thereafter he was seen by
PWs 1, 4, 11 at the gate of Bangabandhu's house at
or about the time of occurrence with a tank and
talked with Major Huda, Major Mohiuddin
(Lancer), Major Noor and others, and when he was
confirmed about the death of Bangabandhu and
other members of his family, he left the place of
occurrence, PW 12 also saw him at about 7-15 AM
at Mirpur road while he was coming out from the
road No.32 with a tank. Besides these oral state-
ments, PW 15 proved the extra judicial confession
of this appellant and PW 51 proved his confession.
The evidence of these witnesses and the confession
sufficiently proved that he was also involved in the
occurrence and the learned Judges of the High Court
Division are perfectly justified in finding his com-
plicity in the murder.

713. As regards Lieutenant Colonel AKM
Mohiuddin (Lancer), it is seen that PWs 4 and 5 saw
him while he was entering into the house of
Bangabandhu by firing. PW 4 further stated that he
saw while this appellant was taking Bangabandhu
down at the stair and thereafter Major Bazlul Huda
and Major Noor shot him to death. Besides these
two witnesses, PW 11 saw him at the gate of Banga-
bandhu’s house at or about the time of occurrence
and PW 12 saw him while he was getting down from
the truck at the entry point of Road No.32 just
before the occurrence. Besides these witnesses, PWs
21 and 22 saw him while they were dropped at the
meeting point of Road No.32. He was implicated by
the three confessing accused and those confessions
were corroborated by the oral evidence on record.
PW I5 also proved his extra-judicial confession.
Therefore, | find that the learned Judges of the High
Court Division have rightly found his complicity in
the incident of 15th August, 1975,

714. As regards Lieutenant Colonel Sultan
Shahriar Rashid Khan PWs14 and 24 proved his
presence at the night parade on 14th August at Balur-
ghat and I have observed earlier'about his  complici-
ty in the occurrence while discussing the evidence
of PW 14, PWs 20, 37, 42, 46 and 47 proved his
subsequent conducts which could be used as corrob-
orating evidence for furnishing further proof of the

correctn of the conclusion of the guilt drawn
from the evidence. He made confessional statements
about his complicity in the occurrence and he alse
made extra judicial confession admitting his
involvement in the killing of the President. The
other two confessing accused also implicated him,
From the above evidence it cannot be said that his
conviction is based without reliable and corroboray.
ing evidence on record.

715. As regards the appellant Lieutenan
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) PWs 17, 18,
21, 22, 24, 25, 27, 29, 32, 34 and 35 proved as
regards his presence at the night parade wherefrom
the troops of his unit came to Kalabagan Lake Cir-
cus play ground, and set up cannons aiming Banga.
bandhu’s house and the Rakshibahini head-quarter.
The witnesses proved that as per his order, his troops
fired 4 rounds of cannon-ball from Kalabagan play
ground aiming Bangabandhu’s house and Rakshi-
bahini headquarter. He did not deny the statement of
these witnesses. In view of these evidence on record
it cannot be said that there is no sufficient materials
on record to implicate him in the occurrence of ISth
August, 1975. He has also admitted his complicity
in the confessional statement. He was also implicat-
ed by other two confessing accused and those con-
fessions have been corroborated by the oral evi-
dence on record. The first learned Judge on a super-
ficial consideration of these witnesses and other evi-
dence disbelieved his complicity in the occurrence.
The learned Judge committed a fundamental error in
holding that his presence at the night parade was a
normal routine work and no exception could be
inferred from this act of participation. The learned
Judge also did not take any exception even after he
was recognised at Kalabagan play ground with can-
nons and his participation for the attainment of the
object by directing his troops to fire cannon-balls
aiming Bangabandhu’s house and Rakshibahini
headquarter at the time of occurrence. In the prem-
ises, there is no doubt that he was involved in the
occurrence and helped the other co-accused to com-
mit the carnage. The second and the Third learned
Judges are perfectly justified in finding his complic-
ity in the occurrence.

716. It will not be out of place to mention here
that all the above prosecution witnesses are army

            
personnel of Lancer and Artillery units with which
the appellants and other co-accused were attached as
officers. The defence failed to point out any enmity
with them or their motive to depose against them in
support of the prosecution case. They appear to be
unbiased, not even remotely inimical to the accused,
The defence also failed to make out which may tend
to indicate that they have a motive for attributing
untruthful statements to the accused. They virtually
admitted their participation in the incident of murder
by not challenging the testimonies of those witness-
es relating to the incriminating part of their com-
plicity. All of them are neutral and trustworthy wit-
nesses. There is no cogent ground to discard their
testimonies. The second and the Third learned
Judges of the High Court Division and the learned
Sessions Judge have believed them as independent
and reliable witnesses.

717. The first learned Judge also believed
PWs 1, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 22, 25, while find-
ing Major Bazlul Huda, Major AKM Mohiuddin
Ahmed, Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman
and Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahrior Rashid
Khan’s guilty of the charges but disbelieved PWs16,
17, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 32, and 35 while dis-
believing about Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin
Ahmed’s (Artillery) complicity in the occurrence.
While disbelieving them, the learned Judge made
inconsistent findings, inasmuch as, the learned
Judge believed some of them while finding the other
four appellants guilty of the charges. The finding of
the learned Judge that “the presence of the convict
with CO at parade was part of duty and that parade
in the night of 14th August was held as per pre-exist-
ing practice as seen from the evidence of PWs 44
and 45” are based on misconception of fact and also
on piecemeal consideration of the evidence of PWs
44 and 45, The learned Judge failed to comprehend
the admitted fact that as a part of conspiracy the
night parade on 14th August was arranged by Lieu-
tenant Colonel Rashid and in course of such night

parade, the accused persons finalised their plan to”

fulfil their criminal object and with that end in view,
they took ammunition from the kote, removed heavy
artillery from the cantonment, deployed the troops
with artillery at key points and thereafter some of
the officers with troops went to the house of the
President to materialise their object and killed the

President and other members of his family over
which I have discussed earlier. If this appellant's
participation at the night parade was a part of pre-
existing practice, then when, where and how the
accused persons hatched up the conspiracy to kill
the President has not been explained by the first
learned Judge. The learned Judge also did not clari-
fy as to why the accused officers directed the troops
to take arms and ammunition and why they amalga-
mated two units after the parade and why the night
parade continued till the early hours of 15th August,
and lastly, why the officers and the troops came to
the President's house from the parade ground, which
sufficiently proved that the nigh parade was the
sheet-anchor of the premeditated criminal conspira-
cy for fulfilling their criminal object.

718, In the case of Nurul Islam 43 DLR (AD)
6, the leave was granted to consider the glaring
inconsistency and discrepancy in the evidence of 4
eye-witnesses, PWs 1, 3, 7 and 8 that cast a doubt as
to the truth of the prosecution case. The Appellate
Division on assessing their evidence found it diffi-
cult to rely upon them and observed that the leamed
Judges of the High Court Division did not consider
the material discrepancy of these eye-witnesses
while maintaining the conviction and sentence, and
set aside the conviction disbelieving the prosecution
case. This decision referred by the learned Counsel
is not applicable in this case in view of the fact that
the prosecution has led unimpeachable evidence
against the accused and that the defence has failed to
point out any inconsistency to discard the evidence
of prosecution witnesses.

719. In the case of Hazrat Ali (54 DLR 636),
it has been observed that when the evidence of wit-
nesses is disbelieved by the Court in respect of a
major part of the prosecution case regarding the
involvement of the accused persons, the testimony
of those witnesses cannot be accepted without inde-
pendent corroboration from other sources. We do
not dispute the observations made by the High Court
Division in that case. In this particular case, the
learned Counsel has failed to point out any major
contradiction in the evidence of the witnesses so as
to disbelieve them in respect of the majority part of
the prosecution case.

720, In the case of Muslimuddin (38 DLR
(AD) 311], the appellants were convicted for the

            
charge of murder relying upon the evidence of the
deceased's wife Majeda (PW 1) who is said to have
been corroborated by PW 3 another e: itness but
the Appellate Division noticed that PW 3 was exam-
ined by the police long after the occurrence, and on
that score disbelieved her evidence. The Appellate
Division also noticed that PW 1 was present in the
hut at the time of occurrence but she was not cor-
roborated by other witnesses, and that it was totally
improbable on her part to recognise so many
accused persons with precision of their overt act and
disbelieved her as well. I failed to understand why
the leamed Counsel has referred this decision. In
that case it has been observed:

“In a criminal trial determination of a dis-
puted fact is the main task before the Court and
such determination is dependent upon consider-
ation of answers given by prosecution witness-
es in their cross-examination. Cross examina-
tion is therefore, indispensably necessary to
bring out desirable facts of a case modifying the
examination in chief or establishing the cross-
examiner’s own case, The object of cross-exa-
mination is two-fold, to bring out the case of the
party cross-examining and to impeach the
creadibility of the witness. In examination in
chief the witness discloses only those facts
which are favourable to the party examining
him and does not disclose the necessary facts
which go in favour of the other side. Cross
examination in a criminal case aims at extrac-
tion of the facts which support the defence ver-
sion which is very often sought to be supposed
by the prosecution. The opponents can of
course establish facts favourable to them by
calling their own witnesses; but “there is some

thing dramatic in proving one’s own case from .

the mouth of the witnesses of the opponent.”

721. As observed above, the defence did not
challenge the incriminating part of the material evi-
dence of the witnesses and therefore, their evidence
remain uncontroverted. The defence failed to estab-
lish facts favourable to them by cross-examining the
witnesses. Therefore, this decision instead of help-
ing the defence helps the prosecution case.

722. In the case of Safdar Ali vs Crown [5
DLR (FC) 107 (64)], it has been observed that in a

criminal case, it is the duty of the Court to reviey,
the entire evidence that has been produced by the
prosecution and the defence. If, after examination of
the whole evidence, the Court is of the opinion tha,
there is a reasonable possibility that the defence py,
forward by the accused must be true, it is clear that
such a view reacts on the whole prosecution, ty
these circumstances, it has been observed, the
accused will be entitled to get benefit of doubt, not as
a matter of grace, but as of right, because the pro.
secution has not proved its case beyond reasonable
doubt. I do not dispute the statement of law argued by
the Federal Court. These are established principle of
law for the administration of criminal justice. In this
particular case, I find that the defence version put for-
warded by the accused does not affect the prosecution
case, rather it supports the prosecution case.

723. In the case of Moyezuddin [31DLR (AD)
37] it has been observed as follows:

“We like to observe that the contradiction
in the statement of a witness, either with his
own statement or with the statement of another
witness, is a task of appreciation of the evi-
dence, and therefore, it is within the jurisdiction
of the trial Court and the Court of appeal on
fact, to deal with the question. No doubt there is
certain rule of prudence governing the case of
contradicting statements. It is first to be seen
whether the alleged statement is a discrepant
statement or contradictory statement. The dis-
crepant statement is one which is either irrele-
vant or incoherent, but it is not irreconcilable. A
discrepant statement is not fatal to the credibil-
ity of a witness. A contradictory statement is
one which is conflicting and is not reconcilable
with other statements either of his own or any
other witness. The question in such case is, that
it is open to a Court of fact either to reject the
whole evidence of a witness as untrustworthy or
to reject the contradictory part as unreliable or
to rely upon that portion, which in the opinion
of the Court, fits in with other evidence and the
facts and circumstances of the case.”

724. What Mr Mamun argued pinpointing the
alleged discrepancy on certain portions of the evi-
dence of the witnesses regarding the presence of
Major Bazlul Huda at the place of occurrence and

            
his identification by the witnesses, are minor in
nature, which cannot be taken as contradictory state-
ments. The learned Counsel failed to point out any
contradictory statements of the witnesses, rather he
avoided the Court’s query as to whether the incrim-
jnating statements made by the witnesses about
Major Bazlul Huda’s overt act had been challenged
in course of cross-examination.
Digital Evidence
725. The prosecution has also tried to prove
the charges against the appellants on the basis of
electronic evidence and an alleged statement of
Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman to a reporter
on an issue of “The Sunday Times” published on
30th May 1976. Md Azizul Hug (PW 58) exhibited
the issue of “The Sunday Times” as Exhibit ‘X’.
This witness stated that as per request of the Crimi-
nal Investigation Department while he was posted as
Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, collected a
copy of the magazine through Mr Shafi-ul-Ahmed,
Counselor, Bangladesh High Commission, London
in which issue, the appellant Syed Faruque Rahman
admitted his complicity in the incident of 15th
August, 1975 to the effect that “I helped to kill
Mujib, dare you put me on trial”, This witness
proved the signature in the forwarding letter sent
with the magazine by Mr Shafi-UAhmed. The trial
Court marked the magazine with a note of objection
by the defence. This witness also exhibited with
objection a video-cassette broadcast by Granada
Independent Television in the United Kingdom in
the “World in Action” series on 2nd August, 1976 as
material Exhibit 32 along with a notorised certifi-
cate issued by Keith Robert Hopkins, Notary Public
certifying that “events leading to the assassination
of the late Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in Bangladesh in
1975 and the military coup d'etat following that
assassination and that to the best of my knowledge,
information and belief the said video cassette is an
authentic copy of a television programme........” Md
Bakhtiar Hossain (PW 59) a local video recorder
lestified that he displayed a video cassette in which
Lieutenant Colenel Rashid and Lieutenant Colonel
Faruque Rahman admitted to Anthony Mascarenhas
in an interview that they killed Bangabandhu along
with his family, Sheikh Moni and Serniabat. He
Proved the cassette as Ext. 12. He stated that some-
one gave him the video cassette. He did not explain

how he received the same and whether or not it was
the original one.

726. Learned Attorney-General contended
that the issue of ‘Sunday Times’ is a ‘document’
within the meaning of the Evidence Act in which
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman in an
interview admitted his participation in the killing of
Bangabandhu, and secondly, the incident of 15th
August as a part of our history, the Court may take
judicial notice of any book or document relating to
the incident under section 57(13) of the Evidence
Act on such fact, which is a relevant fact. Learned
Attorney-General contended that as the accused did
not deny his interview with the reporter on his
examination under section 342 of the Code, this
video-cassette may be admitted as evidence under
section 3 of the Evidence Act. Learned Attorney-
General further contended that in the videocassette
Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman declared him-
self as the killer of Bangabandhu, which could be
taken as corroborative evidence. In support of his.
contention, the learned Attorney-General has cited
the cases of S Partap Singh vs State of Punjab AIR
1964 SC 72 and Islamic Republic of Pakistan vs
Abdul Wali Khan 1976 PLD SC 57.

727. The Court may take judicial notice under
section 57 of the Evidence Act certain matters which
are so notorious or clearly established that evident
of their existence is deemed unnecessary. The fac
enumerated in section 57 of the Evidence Act, if
their existence comes into question, the party who
assert their existence in the first instance, produce
any evidence in support of their assertions. They
need only ask the Court to say whether these facts
exist or not, if the Court’s own knowledge will not
help it, then it must look the matter up: the Court can
if it thinks proper, call upon the parties to assist it. In
my view, the alleged statement made by Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman to a reporter in the
issue of ‘The Sunday Times’ admitting his participa-
tion in the incident on 15th August 1975 will not be
admissible under section 57(13) of the Evidence
Act. Section 81 creates a presumption of g
ness in respect of the documents, such as, (a) an offi-
cial Gazette (b) the London Gazette (c) the Gazette
of Bangladesh (d) the Gazette of any state Govern-
ment, (e) a newspaper or journal, etc. Thou
presumption of genuineness attaches under this secion


            
 to a document purporting to be a newspaper or
journal, it cannot be treated as proof of the facts
reported therein, We cannot take judicial notice of
the facts stated in the news item being in the nature
of hearsay secondary evidence, unless proved by
evidence aliunde, A report in a newspaper or maga-
zine is only hearsay evidence. It is not one of the
documents referred to in section 78(2) of the
Evidence Act by which an allegation of fact can be
proved. The presumption of genuineness attached
under section 81 to a magazine report cannot be
treated as proof of the facts reported therein,

728. Now in respect of admission of Digital or
Electronic Evidence, the party seeking to admit any
statement or admission of any person recorded in a
compact disk (CD) or video-cassette or any interview
conducted by any television channel relating to a rel-
evant fact or fact in issue must produce the original
compact disk or video-cassette or the programme
published in the television channel. The producer of
the programme must certify their authenticity in the
contents stating the date and place of recording of the
programme. The certificate must be signed by the
producer of the programme and his signature has to
be proved. This procedure has not been followed in
this case. The prosecution failed to produce the orig-
inal copy of the video-cassette and the producer did
not certify the authenticity of the cassette.

729. The scientific working group on digital
evidence was established in February 1998 through
a collaborative effort of the Federal Crime Labora-
tory Directors in USA. The scientific working group
on digital evidence as the US-based component of
standardisation efforts conducted by the Inter- national Organisation on Computer Evidence was charged with the development of cross-disciplinary guidelines and standards for the recovery, preserving, and examination of digital evidence including electronic devices. In order to ensure that digital evidence is collected, preserved, examined, or transferred in a manner safeguarding the accuracy and reliability of the evidence, law enforcement and forensic organisations must establish and maintain an effective quality system standard operative procedure are documented quality control guidelines that must be supported by proper case records and use broadly accepted procedures, equipment and materials.

730. Now the question is, if those Procedure,
are followed, whether any digital evidence can, he
admissible in a criminal trial and used Againgy
accused under the existing law, The procedure for
trial of a criminal case has been expressly laid doy,
in the Code. The Procedure laid down therein is the
‘presence of the accused’ while recording the ey.
dence. Section 353 provides the mode of recording
evidence, which reads: aa

“353. Evidence to be taken in presence of
accused—Except as otherwise provided, aly
evidence taken under chapters XX, XXII and
XXIII shall be taken in the presence of the
accused, or, when his personal attendance js
dispensed with, in presence of his Advocate”.

731. This section provides for dispensation
from personal attendance of the accused and in such
cases the evidence can be recorded in presence of
the Advocate. The presence of the Advocate is
deemed to be the presence of the accused. This
shows that actual physical presence is not a manda-
tory requirement. This indicates that the expression
‘presence’ used in the section is not used in the sense
of actual physical presence of the accused. This s
tion is analogous to the confrontation clause set out
in the Sixth Amendment to the US Constitution.
After this amendment the Courts in USA are not
admitting recording evidence by video-conferencing
on the reasoning that video conferencing does not
satisfy the requirements of the confrontation clause.
Video-conferencing is a new scientific device adopt-
ed by the developed countries in which the accused
will be able to cross-examine the witness by putting
suitable questions. In State of Maharashtra vs Dr
Praful B Desai, (2003) 4 SCC 601, the Supreme
Court of India ruled that the evidence taken from a
witness through video-conferencing is compatible
with the requirements of the Code. As regards
admissibility of a statement recorded in a compact
disk or video-cassette or in a television channel, if
the accused does not deny his statement or admis-
sion, there is no difficulty in admitting such digital
or electronic evidence as documentary evidence. If
the accused denies the statement or admission, the
question of its admissibility has to be looked into
under the prevailing rules of evidence. The expres
sion ‘evidence’ has been defined in section 3 of the
Evidence Act, which reads as follows:


            
vidence’ means and includes—

(1) all statements which the Court permits or
requires to be made before it by a witness, in
relation to matters of fact under enquiry; such
statements are called oral evidence;

(2) all documents produced for the inspection
of the Court, such documents are called docu-
mentary evidence.”

The documentary evidence defined in this
section does not cover ‘electronic record’, In
India, sub-section (2) of section 3 has been
amended in the following manner,

(3) all documents including electronic record
produced for the inspection of the Court; such
documents are called documentary evidence.”

732. Thus, under the amended provision, evi-
dence can be oral, documentary and electric record
in India. This means that in criminal matters evi-
dence can also be by way of electronic records such
as, video-cassette, compact disk and video confer-
encing. There is no corresponding law in our coun-
try. This Evidence Act is a procedural law and by the
same time is an on going statute. The principles of
interpreting an on going statute have been very
lucidly explained by Francis Benion in his commen-
taries on ‘Statutory Interpretation’ as under:

“It is presumed parliament intends the
Court to apply to an on going Act a construction
that continuously updates its wordings to allow
for changes since the Act was initially framed.
While it remains law, it has to be treated as
always speaking. This means that in its applica-
tion on any day, the language of the Act though
necessarily embedded in its own time, is never-
theless to be construed in accordance with the
need to treat it as a current law,

“That today’s construction involves the
Supposition that parliament was catering long
ago for a state of affairs that did not then exist
is no argument against that construction.
Parliament, in the wording of an enactment, is
xpected to anticipate temporal developments.
The drafter will foresee the future and allow for
it in the wording.”

733. In National Textile Workers’ Union vs PR
Ramakrishnan, AIR 1983 SC 75 Bhagwati, J speak-
ing for the majority observed as follows:

“We cannot allow the dead hand of the past
to stifle the growth of the living present. Law
cannot stand still; it must change with the chang-
ing social concepts and values. If the bark that
protects the tree fails to grow and expand along
with the tree, it will either choke the tree or if it
is a living tree, it will shed that bark and grow a
new living bark for itself. Similarly, if the law
fails to respond to the needs of changing society,
then either it will stifle the growth of the society
and choke its progress or if the society is vigor-
ous enough, it will cast away the law which
stands in the way of its growth. Law must there-
fore constantly be on the move adapting itself to
the fast-changing society and not lag behind.”

734. It is high time to evaluate how techno-
logical developments are transforming the function-
ing of the legal system. With the emergence of
newer technologies, uncertainties arise with regard
to the application of existing laws and occasionally
there is a need to create new laws to regulate their
use. The need for regulating new technologies is
usually prompted by social and cultural perceptions
about the advantage of a particular technology or
alternatively the scope of its misuse.

735. In chapter 6: The Validity-Reliability
standard for Scientific Evidence’ in David H Daye,
David E. Bernstein & Jennifer L. Mnookin, The New
Wigmore: A Treatise on Evidence—Expert Evidence
it is stated:

“The more dramatic impact of technology
is however, unfolding in the domain of proce-
dure. For instance, investigative agencies have
increasingly come to rely on forensic tech-
niques such as analysis of fingerprints, voice,
handwriting, blood samples, DNA and other
bodily substances for evidence gathering.
Software is also used for reconstructing the
images of suspects and aiding investigation. As
newer technologies are introduced to assist
investigation agencies, it is important to not be
blindly enthusiastic about their reliability. The
use of scientific techniques holds immense
promise in the criminal justice system, but


            
before accepting each technic we must examine
it critically in light of the constitutional rights
granted to citizens and the requisite evidentiary
standard.”

736. The challenges before the criminal jus-
stem are to balance the rights of the accused
while dispensing speedy and effective justice. The
criminal justice system machinery must also meet
the challenge of effectively dealing with the emerg-
ing forms of crime and behaviour of criminals. It is
thus hoped that the obsolete laws prevailing in the
country will be amended and new suitable laws will
also be enacted to respond to the needs of changing
society in the light of the observations made above.
In view of the lack of proper law, I am unable to use
the digital evidence produced by the prosecution in
this case.

Previous and subsequent conducts.

737. Section 8 of the Evidence Act embodies,
ina statutory form, the rule of evidence, that the tes-
timony of resgestae is always allowable when it
goes to the root of the matter. Preparation is a rele-
vant fact it being important in the consideration of
the question whether a person did a particular act or
not, to know whether he took any measures calcu-
lated to bring it about, premeditated action must
necessarily be proceeded not only by impelling
motives but by appropriate preparation. Preparation
and previous attempts to the offence are instances of
previous conduct of the party influencing the rele-
vant fact but other conduct also, whether of a party
or of an agent to a party, whether previous or subse-
quent, and whether influenced by a relevant fact, is
also admissible. Preparation consists in devising or
arranging means necessary for the commission of
the offence. The existence of a design or plan is usu-
ally employed evidentially to indicate the subse-
quent doing of the act planned or designed.

738. If the previous and -subsequent
conducts have any reference to the proceedings
or relevant to the proceedings, must be influ-
enced by the relevant fact. The conduct made
relevant is conduct which is directly and imme-
diately influenced by a relevant fact, and it does
not include actions resulting from some inter-
mediate cause, such as question or suggestions

by other persons. Evidence of contemporaneous
conduct is always admissible as a surrounding
circumstance, to Judge what the real state of
accused’s mind on a previous occasion was, the
surrounding circumstances and subsequen;
events can be referred to. When once the prose.
cution has established the guilt of the accuse
by the evidence of the prosecution witnesses
then such subsequent conduct may be Utilise
as furnishing further proof of the correctness of
the conclusion as to the guilt of the accuseg
drawn from the evidence. This subsequent con.
duct may be exculpatory conduct of the accused
which is equally admissible because an admis.
sion may be proved by or on behalf of the per.
son making it if it is otherwise than an admis-
sion. In Anant Lagu vs State of Bombay AIR
1960 SC 500, it has been observed by
Hidayatullah, J, as follows:

“A criminal trial, of course, is not an
enquiry into the conduct of an accused for any
purpose other than to determine whether he is
guilty of the offence charged. In this connec-
tion, that piece of conduct can be held to be
incriminatory which has no reasonable explana-
tion except on the hypothesis that he is guilty,
Conduct which destroys the presumption of
innocence can alone be considered as material.”

739. The prosecution has proved the previous
conduct of the accused appellants by examining
PWs11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 32,
34, 35, 39 and 40. PW 11 recognised Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Major Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer), and. Major Bazlul Huda at the
night parade, PW 12 recognised Major Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer), Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman and Major Huda at the night parade on 14th
August. PW 13 recognised Major Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer) and Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman. PW 14 recognised Major Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Lancer) and Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar
Rashid Khan. PWs 17 and 18 recognised Lieutenant
Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) at the parade
ground on 14th night. PWs 21 and 22 recognised
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed. (Artillery)
and Major Bazlul Huda at the parade ground. PW 23
recognised Lieutenant Colenel Faruque Rahman at

            
the parade ground. PW 24 recognised Lieutenant
Colonel Faruque Rahman, Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) and Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid
Khan at the parade ground. PW 25 recognised
Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery)
and Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman at the
night parade. PW 27 recognised Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) at Kalabagan. PW 32
recognised Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) at the night parade.

740. PW 34 recognised Lieutenant Colonel

Mohiuddin Ahmed (Artillery) at Kalabagan. PW 35
recognised Lieutenant Colonel Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Amtllery) and Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman
at the night parade ground. PW 39 recognised Lieu-
tenant Colonel Faruque Rahman and Major Mohi-
uddin Ahmed (Lancer) at the night parade ground.
PW 40 stated that Faruque told him that they were
moving to topple the autocratic Government, but
instead of toppling the Government, they killed the
President and other members of his family. I have
discussed their evidence in detail while considering
the charge of criminal conspiracy. The appellants
along with co-accused and their troops marched
from the parade ground towards the key points, took
control of those key points by deploying troops with
arms and ammunition and then their object was
materialised. There is continuity of purpose or
design and continuity of action, the different acts of
the accused may be regarded as parts of the same
transaction. The offence of conspiracy and acts done
in pursuance of the conspiracy form one and the
same transaction. These conducts of the appellants
are relevant which have no reasonable explanation
other than their guilt.

741. PWs 8, 9, 12,15, 16, 20, 23, 24, 37, 42,
44, 45, 46, 47,49 and 60 deposed in support of the
subsequent conduct of the appellants. PW 8 stated
that as per direction of commanding officer Lieu-
tenant Colonel Motiur Rahman to report about the
condition of Bangabandhu’s house, he along with
two officers visited Bangabandhu’s house on 15th
August 1975 and at the gate Major Noor and Major
Bazlul Huda received them, He further stated that
Major Bazlul Huda admitted his complicity in the
killing over which I have discussed earlier, PW:9
went to the Bangabandhu’s house as per direction of

PW 45 on 1Sth August at about 3 PM for ascertain-
ing the condition prevailing in that house, when
Major Bazlul Huda received him at the gate of
Bangabandhu's house. This witness further stated
that under the supervision of Major Mohiuddin, the
dead body of Bangabandhu was sent to Tongipara
through a helicopter. PW 12 stated that he saw
Lieutenant Colenel Syed Faruque Rahman while he
was coming towards Mirpur Road from Road No.32
with a tank at 7-15 AM on 15th August. PW 15 saw
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman,
Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan, Major
Bazlul Huda and Mohiuddin Ahmed (lancer) at
Bangabhaban on the day of occurrence at about 4-00
PM. PW 16 saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman on a jeep while he was approaching
towards south of the house of Bangabandhu in front
of Shang Hai Restaurant, Kalabagan, Mirpur Road
on 15th August in the morning. Thereafter he went
to Bangabhaban and saw Mohiuddin Ahmed
(Artillery) with his troops. PW 20 saw Lieutenant
Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan and Lieutenant
Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman and other officers
inside Bangabhaban after the occurrence.

742. . PW 23 stated that after the incident he
did not see Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rah-
man and Major Mohiuddin Ahmed (Lancer) in the
unit and then he heard that they were staying at
Bangabhaban after the incident of killing. PW. 24
stated that immediately after killing of Minister
Serniabat and members of his family, he saw while
Major Dalim, Major Noor, Major Shahriar and other
accused were entering into the Radio Station. PW 37
stated that after the incident he saw Lieutenant
Colonel Shahriar and other accused were preparing
speech of Khondker Mustaque on 15th August 1975,
at 7-00 AM at the studio No.2 of the Radio Station.
PW 42 made unison statement and stated that he
found Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan,
Major Mohiuddin Ahmed (lancer) and Faruque
Rahman in the Radio Station on 15th August when
the Chiefs of Army, Navy and Air Force came there
to express their allegiance through the radio, He fur-
ther stated that he also found Major Bazlul Huda
and Major Noor when he went to Road No.32 an
15th August at 11-00 AM for taking pictures of the
victims as per direction of the authority, He further
stated that he also saw Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar

            
Rashid Khan, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Rahman,
Major Mohiuddin Ahmed (lancer) and other accused
persons in the President's room at Bangabhaban in
the afternoon on 15th August, PW 44 stated that
while the officers involved in the killing of 15th
August and 3rd November, 1975 were staying in
Bangkok, the “sepahi biplob” (armed revolution)
occurred on 7th November, 1975, that Major
General Ziaur Rahman became the absolute leader
and that after assuming power, he repatriated the
officers involved in the killing of 15th August and
3rd November by arranging their services at differ-
ent Foreign Embassies of Bangladesh. This state-
ment proved that after the incident of 3rd Novem-
ber, the officers involved in the killing of 15th
August left this country and took shelter in
Bangkok. He further stated that those officers made
abortive attempt to revolt against Ziaur Rahman and
thereafter, they were removed from the service and
then they lived abroad as fugitives. The appellants
did not challenge the statements of this witness.

743. PW 45 stated that he saw Major Bazlul
Huda, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque Ahmed and other
co-accused at the oath taking ceremony of Khond-
ker Mustaque Ahmed as President, at Bangabhaban.
PW 46 stated that he saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar
Rashid Khan, Major Bazlul Huda and other accused
persons were sitting beside Khondker Mustaque
Ahmed, who was sitting on the President’s chair on
15th August at about 3-30 PM at Bangabhaban. PW
47 also saw Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan,
Major Mohiuddin (Lancer) and Major Bazlul Huda
at the oath taking ceremony of the then President
and the Cabinet on 15th August. He further stated
that after the incident of 3rd November, Lieutenant
Colonel Rashid and other accused persons left for
Bangkok. These officers are junior army officers
and some of them were removed officers including
Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar. They were not sup-
posed to remain present at such state level ceremo-
ny unless they were not involved in the killing of the
President. These facts suggested that they were
involved in the occurrence. There is corroborative
evidence of PWs 44 and 47 that the appellants and
other accused persons left the country and took shel-
ter in Bangkok after the incident of 3rd November,

1975. It is also an admitted fact that Khandake
Mustaque Ahmed assumed the office of Presiden,
after the death of Bangabandhu. There is also cor.
roborative evidence on record that the appellants
and other accused were found in the company op
Khandaker Mustaque at Bangabhaban. According,
the prosecution, the accused persons as a part of
their conspiracy made Khandaker Mustaque as
President to fulfil their purpose although as per pro.
visions of the Constitution, he was not supposed to
become the President of the country. The appellants’
presence at the Radio Station and Bangabhaban
after the occurrence and their fleeing away from the
country jointly after the incident of 3rd November
1975 when Khandaker Mustaque Ahmed was
dethroned, supported the prosecution case that they
fled from the country for the fear of being prosecut-
ed for the killing. The fact of fleeing away from the
country of the appellants jointly is a relevant fact to
connect them in the occurrence. Otherwise there
was no reason for them to leave the country jointly.
It is also a relevant fact that most of these accused
persons have been absorbed in the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and posted at Foreign Embassies.
They did not deny these facts. PW 49 stated that on
1Sth August Major Dalim introduced him with
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman: after
broadcasting the statements of allegiance by the
Chiefs of Army, Navy and Air Force in the Radio
Station. PW 60 proved the absorption of the accused
persons in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 8th
June, 1976 in pursuance of the Army Headquarter’s
letter under Memo, dated 15th August, 1976.

744, The first leamed Judge disbelieved PW
24 on the reasoning that in course of cross-examina-
tion on behalf of Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque
Rahman he stated that he deposed as per version of
the police against the accused on the apprehension
that he would be made an accused in the case as he
was present at Serniabat’s house. The second
learned Judge, however, believed him on the rea-
sonings that on perusal of his statement in its entire-
ty in cross would suggest that he denied the sugges-
tion but the leamed Sessions Judge recorded his
statement in the positive form inadvertently . He.
however, denied the almost similar suggestion made
on behalf of Lieutenant’ Colonel Mohiuddin
(artillery). In view of the difference in opinion

            
regarding the veracity of this witness we have ven-
tured to assess his evidence afresh in entirety. This
witness deposed in Court on 19th October, 1997
after more than 22 years of the occurrence and at
this belated stage, there was no occasion on his part
to harbour any apprehension of being implicated in
Serniabat's murder case since the case was already
filed long ago. He made this statement in Court and
not before the police. In view of the above, I fully
agree with the views of the second learned Judge
that the learned Sessions Judge inadvertently
recorded the suggestion in affirmative although he
denied the suggestion

745. The first learned Judge also disbelieved
PW 46 about his identification of the appellants
Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rahman, Lieu-
tenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan, Major Bazlul
Huda and other accused at Bangabhaban on the rea-
soning that there was nothing on evidence that he
knew them earlier. This finding of the learned Judge
is inconsistent, inasmuch as, the learned Judge him-
self took exception about these appellants’ presence
at Bangabhaban on the occasion of the oath taking
ceremony of the President and made adverse pre-
sumption that they being junior army officers were
not supposed to remain present at Bangabhaban in
the President’s oath taking ceremony. PWs 15 and
47 also deposed that they saw them at Bangabhaban.
Therefore, the learned second Judge has rightly
believed this witness.

746. The Third learned Judge disbelieved PW

60 who proved Exhibits 10/5, 35, 10/5/A about the

absorption and deployment of the accused persons

in the Foreign Embassies on the reasonings that this

absorption could not be taken as reward of their

involvement in the carnage of 15th August and that

no adverse presumption could be drawn against the
accused by reason of such employment. The Third
leamed Judge erred in law in failing to consider that
there is uncontroverted evidence on record that after
Ziaur Rahman assuming power from Khandaker
Mustaque Ahmed absorbed their services in the
Foreign Ministry and posted most of the accused
persons at different Embassies of Bangladesh and
that unless they were not involved in the occurrence,
there was no reason for their being absorbed in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, some of them were

removed officers. PWs 44 and 47 proved that they
were absorbed by General Ziaur Rahman after he
came to power on 7th March 1975 and that they left
the country on the evening of 3rd March when
Khondker Mustaque Ahmed was dethroned by
Khaled Mosharraf. The accused did not deny those
facts. There is nexus between the accused persons’
fleeing away from the country on 3rd November and
their absorption in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
after Ziaur Rahman assumed power on 7th Novem-
ber, and in the intervening period Khaled Mosharraf
was in power. The Third learned Judge without
properly appreciating the evidence of PWs 44, 45
and 47 disbelieved PW 60. If the evidence of those
witnesses are read together no inference could be
drawn other than that the killers of Bangabandhu
were rewarded by General Ziaur Rahman after he
assumed power on 7th November, 1975.

747. The evidence of these witnesses proved
that the appellants and other co-accused, as part of
their premeditated plan arranged night parade and
then came out from the cantonment with their troops
armed with tanks, cannons and other arms, to the
house of Bangabandhu situated at Road No. 32, and
killed Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
family members, and after the killing they com-
pelled the Chiefs of Army, Navy and Air Force to
express their allegiance of the killing and to accept
Khondker Mustaque Ahmed as the President of the
country. Thereafter they stayed at Bangabhaban,
guarded Khondker Mustaque Ahmed and the Radio
Station so that anybody could topple him. They
attended the oath taking ceremonies of the President
and the Cabinet although they were not supposed to
be present at such national ceremonies. Lieutenant
Colonel Shahriar Rashid Khan was a removed offi-
cer but he was seen at the night parade and then at
the Radio Station in the early hours of 15th August.
He was also found present at Bangabhaban with
other accused at the state ceremony after the car-
nage. Some of the accused arranged for burying the
dead bodies. All these circumstances sufficiently
proved that they were involved in the killing of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and other
members of his family. These conducts of the
accused persons are relevant under section 8 of the
Evidence Act and may be taken as corroborative
evidence for furnishing further proof of their guilt.

            
These previous and subsequent conducts of the
accused appellants played an important part in the
determination of their guilt and could be taken as
circumstantial evidence. All these evidence suffi-
ciently proved beyond doubt that these appellants
and other convicts were involved in the camage of
Sth August 1975, and the learned Judges of the
High Court Division were perfectly justified in find-
ing them guilty of the charges and accepting the
death reference,

748. Now turing to the charge of murder, it is
contended by the learned Counsels that there is no
legal evidence on record in support of the charge
under sections 302/34 of the Penal Code against the
appellants. Mr Khan Saifur Rahman argues that
there is no nexus. between the deployment of
artillery troops at Kalabagan play ground by the
appellant Mohiuddin Ahmed (artillery) and the
killing of Bangabandhu Sheikh’ Mujibur Rahman
and therefore, he has been illegally convicted under
sections 302/34 of the Penal Code. Mr Khan Saifur
Rahman, further contended that if the offence com-
mitted is found to be a mutiny which being a mili-
tary offence, section 34 or section 38 has no manner
of application in this case. Mr Abdur Razaque Khan
argued that Lieutenant Colonel Shahriar Rashid
Khan was not present at or about the place of occur-
rence and in the absence of any overt act or his par-
ticipation in the incident of killing with the other
accused persons, his conviction under sections 302/
34 is totally illegal and baseless. Mr Khan strenu-
ously argued that in order to bring the appellant
Shahriar Rashid Khan within the ambit of section 34
of the Penal Code some overt act or acts relating to
the incident must be established to lead to the infer-
ence that he had participated with the perpetrators of
the crime in a pre-concerted or pre-arranged manner.
Learned Counsel further-argued that this appellant's
presence at the Radio Station at or around 6-00 AM
on 15th August after the occurrence was part of his
official duty, for which, he could not be saddled with
the charge of murder.

749. To meet the points raised, I would like to
discuss the true purports of section 34 which should
be considered along with sections 35 and 38 of the
Penal Code, which read as follows:

“34, When a criminal act is done by S€Vera}
persons, in furtherance of the common intention
of all, cach of such persons is liable for that acy
in the same manner as if it were done by him
alone.

35, Whenever an act, which is criminal onjy
by reason of its being done with a criminal
knowledge or intention, is done by several per.
sons, each of such persons who joins in the ag
with such knowledge or intention is liable for the
act in the same manner as if the act were done by
him alone with that knowledge or intention.

38. Where several persons are engaged or
concerned in the commission of a criminal act,
they may be guilty of different offences by
means of that act.”

750. A reading of these provisions show that
sections 34 and 35 create responsibility for the total
result while section 38 creates individual responsi-
bility only. Section 34 applies where there is a com-
mon intention and for a criminal act done in further-
ance of common intention of all, everyone is equal-
ly responsible. Section 35 requires the existence of
the knowledge or intent in each accused before he
can be held liable if knowledge or intent is necessary
to make the act criminal. Thus if two persons beat a
Third, one intends to cause his death and the other to
cause only grievous injury and there is no common
intention, their offences will be different.

751. This would not be the case if the offence
is committed with a common intention or each
accused posses the necessary intention or knowl-
edge. Section 38 provides for different degrees of
responsibility arising from the same kind of act. The
illustration brings out the point clear :

A attacks Z under such circumstances of
grave provocation that his killing of Z would be
only culpable homicide not amounting to mur-
der. B having ill-will towards Z and intending
to kill him, and not having been subject to the
provocation, assists A in killing Z. Here, though
A and B are both engaged in causing Z’s death,
B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of
culpable homicide.

            
752. A criminal intention within the meaning
of section 34 is simultancous contentious of the
minds of persons participated in the criminal action
to bring such particular result if one facilitates the
execution of the common design; such person com-
mits an act as much as his co-participants actually
committing the planned crime. The essence of the
section is that the person must be physically present
at the actual commission of the crime. This must be
coupled with actual participation, which may be of
passive character such as standing by a door or near
about the incident with the intention of assisting in
furtherance of common intention of all the accused
and with a readiness to play his part when the time
comes for him to act.

753. Let us now apply these principles to the
facts of the present case. As observed above, these
appellants attended in the night parade, and it was
organised to fulfil and implement their object. They
deployed jawans under the command of the officers
at different key points such as, Rakhibahani head-
quarter, BDR headquarter, Radio Station, Minto
Road. and Road No. 32. This deployment of army at
Rakhibahini headquarter gate and BDR gate was a
part of their preconcerted plan to prevent these para-
military forces if they came forward for protecting
the President on getting any information for help.
The deployment at the Radio Station was for pre-
venting any person on behalf of the then Govern-
ment to seek any help from the army, navy, air force,
paramilitary forces, political activists or from other
sources. The deployment at Minto Road was also to
prevent the Ministers to mobilise the public or any
other force for the protection of the President. The
existence of the conspiracy and its objects have to be
inferred from the circumstances and the conduct of
the accused. The principles governing circum-
stances so proved must form a chain of events from
which the only irresistible conclusion about the guilt
of the accused can safely be drawn and on the
hypothesis against the guilt is possible (1977 SCC
(Cri) 1004]. The circumstances before, during and
after the occurrence can be proved to decide about
the complicity of the accused. In Nalini case
[(1999)5 SCC 253] Wadha, J pointed out the crimi-
nal responsibility for a conspiracy requires more or
less passive attitude towards an existing conspiracy.
Learned Judge set out the legal position as under:

“One who commits an overt act with
knowledge of the conspiracy is guilty. And one
who tacitly consents to the object of conspiracy
and goes along with other conspirators actually
standing by while others put the act into effect,
is guilty though he intends to take no active part
in the crime.”

754. They proved that Lieutenant Colonel
Mohiuddin (artillery) was deputed with cannons at
Kalabagan play ground near road No, 32, Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan was deputed
at the Radio Station, Lieutenant Colonel Faruque
Rahman took the overall responsibility for checking
Rakhibahani and the Bangabandhu’s house, Major
Mohiuddin (lancer), Major Bazlul Huda, Major
Noor with some troops were given the task of imple-
menting the main object the killing of the President
and other members of his family.

755. The acts of the appellants and co-accused
that they took control of vital points was a part of the
criminal conspiracy to fulfil the common design of
killing Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and
his family members without any interruption. There
is no dispute that Major Bazlul Huda and Major
Mohiuddin (Lancer) actively participated in the
killing, of them, Major Bazlul Huda shot to death
Sheikh Kamal and the President. His act attracts sec-
tion 302 but he has been charged under sections
302/34 of the Penal Code. His conviction cannot be
converted to one under section 302 for the substan-
tive offence.

756. Major AKMMohiuddin (Lancer) brought
the President down for facilitating his killing. He
has actively participated in the act of killing.
Although Lieutenant Colonel Syed Faruque Rah-
man did not join in the actual killing but his pres-
ence at the main gate of Bangabandhu with a tank at
the time of killing was part of the agreement with a
view to attainment of the object which all the
accused persons were pursuing. Simil Lieuten-
ant Colonel Mohiuddin (artillery) aided co-accused
Major Bazlul Huda, Major AKM> Mohiuddin
(Lancer) and others in the attainment of the object
by his act of remaining present with troops and
artillery with the motive that if anybody come for-
ward to rescue the President, he would resist them,
and with that object, he fired four cannon-balls let-


            
ting others know that he was prepared to use the
cannon- balls whenever time comes for him to act,
The acts of the: ‘cused persons lead to the con-
clusion unaffected by reasonable doubt that they
were parties to the conspiracy and guilty of criminal
conspiracy for killing Bangabandhu and other mem-
bers of his family. Their offence can also be spelt out
by applying the principle of constructive liability for
the offence of murder as they participated in the
ime in furtherance of common intention of all.
mittedly Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar
Rashid Khan was not present at the place of occur-
rence. He was deployed at the Radio Station at the
¢ of occurrence. As observed above, his task was
also for preventing anyone from seeking any help by
sending message through the radio. Now the crux of
the point is whether his act falls within the ambit of
section 34 since he was not physically present at the
place of occurrence. The learned Judges of the High
Court Division were of the view that he shared the
common intention with other accused- persons,
although his participation was not active, it was pas-
sive, which act also attracted the ambit of section
34. The first learned Judge observed that “besides
being present at the night parade and his presence at
the Radio Station was part of the said agreement that
he entered into agreement with other convicts for
the purpose of causing the incident in the official
residence of the President”, The second learned
Judge also noticed his presence at the Radio Station
about 4-30/5-00 AM and expressed similar views.
The learned Judges considered the cases of Baren-
dra Kumar Ghose vs Emperor, AIR 1925 PC 1,
Shocekantiah Ramayya Muni Palli, vs State of
Bombay AIR 1955 SC 287, Takaram Gonapat vs
State of Maharashtra AIR 1974 SC 514, Rama-
swami vs State of TN, AIR 1976 SC 2027, Abdur
Kahman Mandol vs State , 29 DLR (SC)247,
Bangladesh vs Abed Ali, 36 DLR (AD) 234, Abdus
Samad @ AKM Abdus Samad vs State 44 DLR (AD)
233 and State vs Tajul Islam 48 DLR 305 in coming
to their conclusion.

757. As observed above, the dominant feature
of section 34 of the Penal Code is the element of
participation in actions. This participation need not
in all cases be by physical presence. Common inten-
tion implies acting in concert, This section requires
that there must be a general intention shared by all

the persons united with a common purpose to do any
criminal offence, all of those who assist in the
accomplishment of the object would be equally
guilty. It follows, therefore, that common intention
is an intention to commit a crime actually commit.
ted and everyone of the accused should have partic.
ipated in that intention. In Barendra Kumar Ghosh;
case, their Lordships of the Privy Council ha:
clearly expounded the principles animated in
section. In that case three men fired at the postmas-

ter, of whom Barendra Kumar, the appellant, was

one of them. He wore distinctive clothes by which

he could be identified; and while these men were

just inside the room, another was visible from the

room through the door standing close to the others
but just outside on the doorstep in the Courtyard.
This man was armed but did not fire. The defence of
Barendra was that he was the man outside the room,
that he stood in the Courtyard and was very much
frightened. It was observed that whether he was
present as one of the firing party or as its command-
er or as its reserve or its sentinel was of no special
importance on the case made for the Crown. Why he
was there at all and why he did not take himself off
again he did not say, nor did he even indicate his
precise position in the yard. Their Lordships while
maintaining his conviction expounded the ambit of
section 34 as follows:

“By section 33 a criminal act in section 34
includes a series of acts and, further “act
includes omission to act, for example, an omis-
sion to interfere in order to prevent a murder
being done before one’s very eyes. By section
37, when any offence is committed by means of
several acts whoever intentionally cooperates in
the commission of that offence by doing
one of those acts, either singly or jointly with
any other person, commits that offence. Even if
the appellant did nothing as he stood outside the
door, it is to be remembered that in crimes as in
other things “they also serve who only stand
and wait.” By section 38 when several persons:
are engaged or concerned in the comm
a criminal act, they may be guilty of different
offences by means of that act. Read together
these sections are reasonably plain. section 3+
deals with the doing of separate acts, similar offense
, by several persons; if all are done in


            
furtherance of a common intention, each person
is liable for the result of them all, as if he had

done them himself for “that act” and “the act”
in the latter part of the section must include the

whole action covered by “a criminal act” in the
first part, because they refer to it.” (emphasis
given)

758. Therefore, the dominant feature of sec-

tion 34 is the element of participation in action, this
participation need not be in all cases by physical
presence. The Supreme Court of India in Jaikrishna-
das Monohardas Desai vs State of Bombay, AIR
1960 SC 889 has distinguished the cases in which
the physical presence of the accused person at the
place of incident is prerequisite and in which cases
the physical presence of the accused is not neces-
sary- his participation by doing separate acts similar
or diverse would bring him within the ambit of the
section. It has been observed as follows:

“But the essence of liability under section
34 is to be found in the existence of a common
intention animating the offenders leading to the
doing of a criminal act in furtherance of the
common intention and presence of the offender
sought to be rendered liable under section 34 is
not, on the words of the statute, one of the con-
ditions of its applicability. As explained by
Lord Summer in Barendra Kumar Ghose vs
Emperor, 52 In App 40 at p.52 (AIR 1925 PC 1
at p.7), the leading feature of section 34 of the
Indian Penal Code is ‘participation in action’.
To establish joint responsibility for an offence,
it must of course be established that a criminal
act was done by several persons; the participa-
tion must be in doing the act, not merely in its
planning. A common intention—a meeting of
minds—to commit an offence and participation
in the commission of the offence in furtherance
of that common intention invites the application
of section 34. But this participation need not in
all cases be by physical presence. In offences
involving physical violence, normally presence
at the scene of offence of the offenders sought
to be rendered liable on the principle of joint
liability may be necessary, but such is not the
case in respect of other offences where the
offence consists of diverse acts which may be

done at different times and places. (emphasis

added)

759. These views have been approved in
Ramaswami Ayyangar s case (AIR 1976 SC 2027) as
under:

“The contention is fallacious and cannot be
accepted. Section 34 is to be read along with the
preceding section 33 which makes it clear that
the “act” spoken of in section 34 includes a
series of acts as a single act. It follows that the
words “when a criminal act is done by several
persons” in section 34, may be construed to
mean “when criminal acts are done by several
persons.” The acts committed by different con-
federates in the criminal action may be different
but all must in one way or the other participate
and engage in the criminal enterprise, for
instance, one may only stand guard to prevent
any person coming to the relief of the victim or
to otherwise facilitate the execution of the com-
mon design. Such a person also commits an
“act” as much as his co-participants actually
committing the planned crime. In the case of an
offence involving physical violence, however,
it is essential for the application of section .34
that the person who instigates or aids the com-
mission of the crime must be physically present
at the actual commission of the crime for the
purpose of facilitating or prompting the
offence, the commission of which is the aim of
the joint criminal venture. Such presence of
those who in one way or the other facilitate the
execution of the common design, is itself tanta-
mount to actual participation in the ‘criminal
act.’ The essence of section 34 is simultaneous
consensus of the minds of persons participating
in the criminal action to bring about a particular
result. Such consensus can be developed at the
spot and thereby intended by all of them.

(emphasis added)

760. In the case of Shocekantiah Ramayya
Munipalli vs State of Bombay, (AIR 1955 SC 287) it
was observed :

“The essence of section 34 that the person

must be physically present at the scene of
occurrence coupled with actual participation

            
which, of course can be of a passive character
such as standing by a door, provided that is
done with the intention of consisting in further-
ance of common intention of them all and there
is a readiness to play his part in the prearranged
plan when the time comes for him to act”.
(emphasis given)

761. Five member Bench of this Court also
took similar views in Abdur Rahman Mondal’s case
[29 DLR (SC) 247] as follows :

“The common intention to bring about a
particular result may well develop on the spot
as between a number of persons. All that is nec-
essary is either to have direct proof of prior con-
cert or proof of circumstances which necessari-
ly lead to that inference or the incriminating
acts must be incompatible with the innocence of
the accused and incapable of explanation on
any other reasonable hypothesis. Further, it is
the essence of section 34 that the person must
be physically present at the actual commission
of the crime.” (emphasis added)

762. The leamed second Judge also consid-
ered the case of Rasool Bux vs State 22 DLR (SC)
297, in which case the views taken in Barendra
Ghosh have been approved. In that case accused Lal
Bux and Rasul Bux abducted Mst Roshna from the
house of her father, if necessary, by the use of force.
They were both armed with deadly weapons. When
their presence was discovered in the Courtyard they
abandoned their original plan but were nevertheless
determined to escape, if necessary by use of
weapons carried by them.

763. In the facts of the case, H Rahman, CJ,
speaking for the Supreme Court observed:

“There is no doubt that to bring a case
within the ambit of section 34, PPC it is neces-
sary that some overt act or acts must be estab-
lished to lead to the inference that the participa-
tors in the crime acted in pre-concert or under
some pre-arranged plan but this does not mean
that every participant in the crime must be
shown to have committed the same kind of act.
It is sufficient to show that they joined together
in the commission of a particular act, for then
they must all be deemed to have intended the

natural and inevitable consequences of that act
even if some of them did nothing but merely
helped by their presence the commission Of the
act.” (emphasis added)

764. In Tajul Islam's case (48 DLR 305), the
High Court Division noticed the evidence produced
by the prosecution in support of charge that Badshs
in his confession stated that he pressed the legs of
second son of Biroja Rani, and accused Inu cut him
into two pieces by a dao. Other confessing accused
stated that for the purpose of committing the offence
they went to the house of Biroja and were on guard
either in the boat or in front of the door of neigh-
bours of Biroja or in the road leading to the house of
Biroja presumably to prevent any person from com-
ing in the way of their committing the offence.

765. In the facts of the case the learned Judges
observed as follows:

“In offence involving physical violence,
normally presence at the scene of the occur-
rence of the offender sought to be rendered
liable on the principle of joint liability is neces-
sary such is not the case in respect of other
offences where offence consists of adverse acts
which may be done at different time and place.”

766. Thus, the consistent views right from the
Privy Council to apex Courts of India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh are that in order to bring an offence
within the ambit of section 34, in respect of physical
violence, the offender must be physically present at
the actual commission of the crime for the purpose
of facilitating the offence. Even if the offender did
nothing but merely helped by his presence for facil-
itating the offence, he will be liable for joint liabili-
ty. In order to bring the offence within the ambit of
the section there must be simultaneous consensus of
minds of persons participating in the criminal action
to bring about a particular result, such consensus can
be developed at the spot.

767. In Noor Md Yusuf Momin vs State of
Maharastra, AIR 1971 SC 885, the trial Court con
victed Md Taki Haji Hussain Momin under section
302 and acquitted three other accused including the
appellant. On appeal against acquittal, the Bombay
High Court reversed the acquittal and convicted the
appellant and two others under section 120B and

            
302 read with section 34, IPC The appellant was
also convicted under sections 302/109 IPC and sen-
tenced to imprisonment for life on two counts sepa-
rately. As there was no conclusive evidence about
the appellant's physical presence at the place of
occurrence, the Supreme Court gave him the benefit
of doubt of sharing common intention in the accom-
plishment of the object and acquitted him of the
charge under sections 302/34 on the following
observations:

“From the evidence it seems highly proba-
ble that at the time of the actual murder of Mohd.
Yahiya the appellant was either present with
other three co-accused or was somewhere near-
by. But this evidence does not seem to be enough
to prove beyond reasonable doubt his presence at
the spot in the company of the other accused
when the murder was actually committed ....:.+
we are, therefore, inclined to give to the appel-
lant the benefit of doubt in regard to the charge
under section 302 read with section 34, IPC.”

768. 1 am not inclined to multiply the deci-
sions on this point any further. As observed above,
several persons can simultaneously attack a man and
each can have the same intention, namely the inten-
tion to kill and each can individually inflict a sepa-
rate fatal blow and yet none could be vicariously
convicted for the act of any of the others . Same or
similar intention should not be confused with com-
mon intention. Similarly, it should be borne in mind
that physical presence at the scene of occurrence is
necessary for a man can be vicariously liable for an
offence of physical violence since the essence of
common intention is simultaneous consensus of the
minds of persons participating in the criminal action
to bring about a particular result.

769. The application of section 34 in respect
of the offences other than physical violence have
been explained in Tukaram Ganpat’s case (AIR
1974 SC 514). The facts against the accused includ-
ing the appellant Tukaram Ganpat were that they
stole some bundles of copper wire from the godown
of a company after breaking open the godown and
removed them away by a lorry which stopped at a
weigh-bridge where the brokers for sale were pres-
ent. There was no evidence about the presence of the
appellant at the scene of offence. The concurrent’

findings of the Courts below were that the appellant
was in possession of duplicate keys of the burgled
godown found missing from the factory and that he
was present at the weigh bridge, The appellant had
no explanation for possessing of godown keys nor
for his presence at weigh-bridge. In the context of
the matter the Supreme Court maintained the con-
Viction of the appellant on applying the principles of
common intention as under:

“Mere distance from the scene of crime
cannot exclude culpability under section 34
which lays down the rule of joint responsibility
for a criminal act performed by a plurality of
persons. In Barendra Kumar Ghosh vs King
Emperor (1924) 52 IA 40 = (AIR 1925 PC 1)
the Judicial Committee drew into the criminal
net those ‘who only stand and wait.’ This does
not mean that some form of presence, near or
remote, is not necessary, or that mere presence
without more, at the spot of crime, spells culpa-
bility. Criminal sharing, overt or covert by
active presence or by distant direction, making
out a certain measure of jointness in the com-
mission of the act is the essence of section 34.
Even assuming that presence at the scene is a
pre-requisite to attract section 34 and that such
propinquity is absent. section 107 which is dif-
ferent in one sense, still comes into play to rope
in the accused. The act here is not the picking
the godown lock but housebreaking and crimi-
nal house trespass. This crime is participated in
by those operating by remote control as by
those doing physical removal. Together operat-
ing in concert, the criminal project is executed.
Those who supply the duplicate key, wait at the
weigh bridge for the break-in and bringing of
the booty and later secrete the keys are par-
ticipes criminis. And this is the role of accused
No.2 according to the Courts below. Could this
legal inference be called altogether untenable?

770. The Supreme Court explained the princi-
ples of joint liability observing that mere distance
from the scene of crime cannot exclude culpability
under section 34 of the Penal Code in criminal shar-
ing making out a certain measure of jointness in the
commission of the act. The learned Judges failed to
appreciate the ratio decidendi of this decision and

            
applied it in this case which is not applicable in the
facts and circumstances of this case, | do not dispute
the principle of law stated and considered by the High
Court Division eases and those are settled principles.
The prosecution is required to prove the physical
presence of the accused persons at the place of occurrence in order to bring them within the ambit of section 34 of the Penal Code because the common intention to commit an offence of physical violence develops at the spot. Even if it is assumed that section 34 is not applicable in respect of Lieutenant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan, this would, however, be of little practical benefit to him because his participation in the criminal conspiracy to implement the object has been established by the prosecution.

771. There is no substantial difference bet-
ween conspiracy as defined in section 120A and act-
ing on a common intention as contemplated in sec-
tion 34. In the former the gist for the offence is bare
agreement and association to break law even though
illegal act does not follow while the gist of an
offence under section 34 is the commission of a cri-
minal act in furtherance of a common intention of all
the offenders which means that there should be a
unity of criminal behaviour resulting in something
for which an individual will be punishable if it is
done by himself alone. When a criminal conspiracy
for committing murder has been established there is
no need to award a conviction in the aid of section
34 for, in an offence of criminal conspiracy anything
said, done or written in reference to their common
intention afier the intention was entertained is rele-
vant against all the accused. When specific acts
done by each of the accused have been established
showing their common intention they are admissible
against each and every other accused. Though an act
or action of one accused cannot be used as evidence
against other accused but an exception has been
carved out in section 10 of the Evidence Act in case
of criminal conspiracy, If there is reasonable ground
to believe that two or more persons have conspired
together in the light of the language used in 120A of
the Penal Code, the evidence of acts done by one of
the accused can be used against the other.

772. Section 120A which defines criminal
conspiracy enacts that an agreement to commit an

offence may itself amount to a

criminal conspiracy

even if no overt act follows on the agreement. The
second class of cases is that in which the Conspiracy

is formed in order to do an illegal act or an act rot
illegal by illegal means; this sort of conspiracy in no
case amounts to abetment and does not amount ty
criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the

agreement is done in pursuance thereof. It is thy

clear that section 120A provides the extended deg.
nition of criminal conspiracy covering acts which dp,
not amount to abetment by conspiracy within th.
meaning of section 107; Section 120B provides pun-
ishment for criminal conspiracy where no exp
provision is made in the Penal Code for the pu
ment of such conspiracy.

773. Sub-section (1) of section 120B imposes
a penalty equal to the punishment for abetment on
participation in criminal conspiracy to commit an
offence. The section appears to have been intro-
duced to fill up the gap in section 107 defining
abetment- Under section 107 “secondly” provides
that a person abets the doing of a thing who engages
with others in a conspiracy for doing of that thing if
an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of
that conspiracy. Abetment of an offence is punish-
able under sections 109 and 116 as the case maybe.
if the offence is not committed; but it is clear that 2
conspiracy will not amount to an abetment unless an
act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of
the conspiracy. Therefore, the first class of cases
which section 120B is designed to cover, is that in
which the conspiracy is formed for the commission
of a serious offence. But no act or illegal omission
has taken place in presence of it. Put very briefly, the
distinction between the offence of abetment under
the second clause of section 107 and that of criminal
conspiracy under section 120 A is this, in the former
offence a mere combination of persons or agreement
between them is not enough. An act or illegal omis-
sion must take place in pursuance of the conspiracy
and in order to the doing of the thing conspired for:
in the latter offence the mere agreement is enough,
if the agreement is to commit an offence. In pur-
Suance of the criminal conspiracy if the conspirators
‘commit several offences, then all of them will be
liable for the offences even if some of them had not
actively participated in the commission of the
offences. It is not required to prove that each and
every person who is a party to the conspiracy must


            
do some overt act towards the fulfilment of the
object of conspiracy, the essential ingredient being
an agreement between the conspirators to commit
the crime since from its very nature a conspiracy is
hatched in secrecy, direct evidence of a criminal
conspiracy to commit a crime is not available other-
wise the whole purpose may  frustral
cases only the circumstantial evidence which is
available from which an inference giving rise to the
commission of an offence of conspiracy may be
legitimately drawn,

774. In Noor Md Yusuf Momin (Supra), the
distinctive features of sections 34, 107 and 120B are
explained. It is said that so far as section 34 of the
Penal Code is concerned, it embodies the principle
of joint liability in the doing of a criminal act, the
essence of that liability being the existence of a
common intention, Participation in the commission
of the offence in furtherance of the common inten-
tion invites its application. Section 109 of the Penal
Code, on the other hand, may be attracted even if the
abettor is not present when the offence abetted is
committed provided that he has instigated the com-
mission of the offence or has engaged with one or
more other persons in a conspiracy to commit an
offence and pursuant to that conspiracy some act or
illegal omission takes place or has intentionally
aided the commission of an offence by an act or ille-
gal omission on a charge under section 120B of the
Penal Code. An offence of criminal conspiracy was
made a substantive offence in 1913 by the introduc-
tion of Chapter V-A in the Penal Code. ID Dua, J
spoke for the Supreme Court as under:

“Criminal conspiracy postulates an agree-

ment between two or more persons to do, or
cause to be done, an illegal act or an act which
is not illegal, by illegal means, It differs from
other offences in that mere agreement is made
an offence even if no step is taken to carry out
that agreement. Though there is close associa-
tion of conspiracy with incitement and abet-
ment the substantive offence of criminal con-
spiracy is somewhat wider in amplitude than
abetment by conspiracy as contemplated its
very nature is generally hatched in secret. It is,
therefore, extremely rare that direct evidence in
proof of conspiracy can be forthcoming from

wholly disinterested quarters or from. utter
strangers. But, like other offences, criminal
spiracy can be proved by circumstanti:
dence, Indeed, in most cases proof of conspira-
cy is largely inferential though the inference
must be founded on solid facts, Surrounding
circumstances and antecedent and subsequent
conduct, among other factors, constitute rele-
vant material. In fact, because of the difficulties
in having direct evidence of criminal conspira-
cy, once reasonable ground is shown for believ-
ing that two or more persons have conspired to
commit an offence then anything, done by any-
one of them in reference to their common inten-
tion after the same is entertained becomes,
according to the law of Evidence, relevant for
proving both conspiracy and the offences com-
mitted pursuant thereto, ”

775. The next question is, whether a convic-
tion on the charge of conspiracy could have been
given after the conspiracy has borne its fruits as
raised by Mr Abdur Razaque Khan. In State of
Ahdhra Pradesh vs Kandimalla Subbaiah IR 1961
SC 1241, the point for consideration was whether an
offence is said to have been committed in conse-
quence of abetment, when it has been committed in
pursuance of the conspiracy, and the abettor by con-
spiracy can be made punishable with the punish-
ment provided for the actual offence. The Supreme
Court of India argued the point as under:

“Conspiracy to commit an offence is itself
an offence and a person can be separately
charged with respect to such a conspiracy.
There is no analogy between section 120B and
section 109, IPC There may be an element of
abetment in a conspiracy; but conspiracy is
something more than an abetment. Offences
created by sections 109 and 120B, IPC are quite
distinct and there is no warrant for limiting the
prosecution to only one element of conspiracy,
that is, abetment, when the allegation is that
what a person did was something over and
above that. Where a number of offences are
committed by several persons in pursuance of a
conspiracy it is usual to charge them with those
offences as well as with the offence of conspir-
acy to commit those offence.”

            
776. In the State of Andhra Pradesh vs
Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao, AIR 1963 SC1850,
similar points arose. It is said that the offence of
conspiracy is an entirely independent offence and
though other offences are committed in pursuance
of the conspiracy the liability of the conspirators for
the conspiracy itself cannot disappear. In the Penal
Code, as originally enacted, conspiracy was not an
offence. Section 120B which makes criminal con-
spiracy punishable was added by the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1913 (Act VIII of 1913) along
with section 120A. Section 120A defines conspiracy
and section 120B provides for the punishment for
the offence of conspiracy.

777. Criminal conspiracy, as defined in sec-
tion 120A, consists of an agreement to do an illegal
act or an agreement to do an act which is not illegal
by illegal means. Section 120B provides that who-
ever is a party to a conspiracy to commit an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rig-
orous imprisonment for a term of two years or
upwards shall be punishable in the same manner as
if he has abetted such offence unless there was an
express provision in the Code for the punishment of
such conspiracy. JR Mudholkar, J speaking for the
Supreme Court argued as under:

“Criminal conspiracy was, however, not an
unknown thing before the amendment of the
Indian Penal Code in 1913. But what the amend-
ment did was to make that conspiracy itself pun-
ishable. The idea was to prevent the commission
of crimes by, so to speak, nipping them in the
bud. But it does not follow that where crimes
have been committed the liability to punishment
already incurred under section 120B by having
entered into a criminal conspiracy is thereby
wiped away. No doubt, as already stated, where
offences for committing which a conspiracy was
entered into have actually been committed it may
not, in the particular circumstances of a case, be
desirable to charge the offender both with the
conspiracy and the offences committed in pur-
suance of that conspiracy, But that would be a
matter ultimately within the discretion of the
Court before which the trial takes place.”

778. Ina later case in Suresh Chandra Bahri
vs Gurbachan Singh AIR 1994 SC 2420, Suresh
Bahri Bachan and Raj Pal Sharma were convicteg
under section 302 of the Penal Code-they were also
convicted under sections 302/120B for committing
murder of three persons in pursuance of the offence
of criminal conspiracy. Two of them were also con.
victed under section 201 for causing disappearance
of evidence. The Patna High Court maintained the
sentence of death. In the Supreme Court it was
argued that there is no direct and legal evidence
against Gurbachan and Raj Pal for their involvement
in the conspiracy and that there is no evidence against
Gurbachan about his participation in the crime. In the
context of the matter, the Supreme Court while main-
taining the conviction under sections 302/120B of the
accused on the basis of circumstantial evidence con-
sidered whether such conviction can be given in pur-
suance of criminal conspiracy. It is said that the pro-
visions of section 120A of the Penal Code defines
criminal conspiracy. It provides that when two or
more persons agree to do, or cause to be done (1) an
illegal act, or (2) an act which is not illegal by illegal
means, such agreement is designated a criminal con-
spiracy; provided that no agreement except an agree-
ment to commit an offence shall amount to criminal
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is
done by one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof. Thus a cursory look to the provisions contained in section 120A reveal that a criminal conspiracy envisages an agreement between two or more persons to commit an illegal act or an act which by itself may not be illegal but the same is 
done or executed by illegal means. The essential ingredient of the offence of criminal conspiracy is the agreement to commit an offence. In a case where the agreement is for accomplishment of an act which by itself constitutes an offence, then in that event no overt act is necessary to be proved by the prosecution because in such a fact situation criminal conspiracy is established by proving such an agreement. In other words, where the conspiracy alleged is with regard to commission of a serious crime of the nature as contemplated in section 120B read with the proviso to subsection (2) of section 120A, Penal Code, then in that event mere proof of an agreement between the

            
accused for commission of such a crime alone is
enough to bring about a conviction under section
120B and the proof of any overt act by the accused
by any one of them would not be necessary.  Faizan
Uddin, J on consideration of almost all earlier deci-
sions on the point argued as under:

“The provisions in such a situation do not
require that each and every person who is a
party to the conspiracy must do some overt act
towards the fulfilment of the object of conspir-
acy, the essential ingredient being an agreement
between the conspirators to commit the crime
and if these requirements and ingredients are
established the act would fall within the trap-
ping of the provisions contained in section
120B since from its very nature a conspiracy
must be conceived and hatched in complete
secrecy, because otherwise the whole purpose
may frustrate and it is common experience and
goes without saying that only in very rare cases
one may come across direct evidence of a crim-
inal conspiracy to commit any crime and in
most of the cases it is only the circumstantial
evidence which is available from which an
inference giving rise to the conclusion of an
agreement between two or more persons to
commit an offence may be legitimately drawn.”

779. Therefore, in order to constitute the
offence of conspiracy, there must first be a combin-
ing together of two or more persons in the conspira-
cy; secondly, an act or illegal omission must take
place in pursuance of that conspiracy in order to the
doing of that thing. It is not necessary that the abet-
tor should concert the offence with the person who
commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the con-
spiracy in pursuance of which the offence is com-
mitted. Therefore, | find that each conspirator plays
his separate part in one integrated and united effort
to achieve the common purpose. The cumulative
effect of the proved circumstances should be taken
into account in determining the guilt of the accused
rather than adopting an isolated approach to each of
the circumstances. Each one is aware that he has a
part to play in a general conspiracy though he may
not know all its secrets or the means by which the
common purpose is to be accomplished. The com-
mon intention of the conspirators then is to work for

the furtherance of the common design. Mr Abdur
Razaque Khan finally argues that the act of Lieuten-
ant Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan’s attracts
an offence of abetment of murder punishable under
section 109 of the Penal Code. In support of his con-
tention, the learned Counsel has referred the cases of
Md Shamsul Hoque vs State 20 DLR 540, Amor
Kumar Takur vs State 40 DLR (AD) 147, Hazrat Ali
vs State 44 DLR (AD)51 and Dharan Pal vs State of
Haryana (1978) 4 SCC 440. Md Shamsul Hoque’s
case was decided following the case in A/R 1935
Mad 130, which was also followed in 8 DLR 48. It
was observed in the Madras case that where an
offence is alleged to have been committed by two or
more persons, the person responsible for commis-
sion of the offence should be charged with the sub-
stantive offence, while the persons alleged to have
abetted it by conspiracy should be charged with the
offence of abetment under section 109. The views in
AIR 1938 Mad 130 have been overruled in Kandi-
malla Subbaiah’s case (AIR 1961 SC 1241 paras 7
and 8). The facts and the principles of law applica-
ble in Amar Kumar Thakur ’s case are quite distin-
guishable. In that case the accused were charged for
an offence punishable under sections 302/34, and
this Court on sifting evidence came to the conclu-
sion that “the appellant Nos.2-4 had no intention of
their own to cause the death of Nandalal particular-
ly when he was proceeding at their request to hold
the mediation at that unearthly hour of the night.” In
Hazrat Alis case, the Appellate Division on assess-
ment of the evidence came to the conclusion that
Hazrat Ali abetted the offence of the murder of
Zahura Khatun and converted his conviction to one
under sections 302/109 from an offence of sections
302/34. In Dharam Pal’ case, it was observed that
the existence or otherwise of the common intention
depends upon the facts and circumstances of each
case, and in the absence of materials, “the compan-
ion or companions cannot justifiably be held guilty
for every offence committed by the principal offend-
er.” These cases are quite distinguishable and not
applicable in this case. On an overall consideration
of the evidence and the principles of law discussed
above, I fully agree with the conclusion arrived by
the High Court Division that the appellants and
other convicts hatched up conspiracy to kill Banga-
bandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the members


            
of his family and accomplished their object by
killing them and three other security personnel. Ina
case where the agreement is for accomplishment of
an act which constitutes an offence, then if the pros-
ecution fails to prove the overt act committed by
each of the conspirators, the criminal conspiracy is
established by proving such agreement and the
proof of overt act by all the accused would not be
necessary. In other words, in such situation it is not
required that each and every accused who is a party
to the conspiracy must do some overt act towards
the fulfilment of the object of conspiracy. In this
case, although an offence of murder has been com-
mitted in pursuance of conspiracy; the liability of
the conspirators for the conspiracy cannot disappear.
When specific act done by each of the accused have
been established showing their common intention,
they are admissible against each and every other
accused. In the case of Nalini [(1999) 5 SCC 253]
the accused persons were arraigned as members of
the conspiracy to extirpate former Prime Minister of
India Rajiv Gandhi. The accused persons were con-
victed under sections 302/120B of the Indian Penal
Code. Their conviction was maintained by the
Supreme Court. Similarly, in Kehar Singh’ case,
(AIR 1988 SC 1883), Kehar Singh, Balbir Singh and
Satwant Singh were charged under section 302 read
with section 120B and other offences for the assas-
sination of Smt. Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister
of India by her security guards. The conviction of
the two accused was maintained by the Supreme
Court. In Suresh Chandra Bahri’ case (AIR 1994
SC 2420) the Supreme Court of India maintained the
conviction of three accused under sections 302/
120B of the Penal Code. On consideration of the
evidence on record and the principles of law dis-
cussed above, | am of the view that the proper con-
viction of the appellants Lieutenant Colonel Syed
Faruque Rahman, Lieutenant Colonel. Mohiuddin
Ahmed (Artillery), Major AKMMohiuddin Ahmed
and Major Bazlul Huda would have been under sec-
tion 302 read with section 120B and section 34 of
the Penal Code instead of sections 302/34 and sec-
tion 120B of the Penal Code, and that of Lieutenant
Colonel Sultan Shahriar Rashid Khan under sections
302/120B of the Penal Code. Their conviction is
modified accordingly. Confirmation of sentence.

780. It is contended that since the appellants
have been in the death cell for a long period, the
ends of justice demands that the sentence awarded
to the appellants be commuted to imprisonment for
life, In this connection Mr Khan Saifur Rahman, has
referred the case of Nurul Hoque Kazi vs State 7
BLC (AD) 52. Mr Abdullah-al-Mamun_ learneq
Counsel adds this prolonged delay in carrying our
sentence of death after their sentence had been
passed amounts to inhuman punishment and ton
and violative of fundamental rights guaranteed jr
Article 35(5) of the Constitution. According to the
learned Counsel, under this provision no person
shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading punishment or treatment, and on consid-
eration of their sufferings the sentence of death
awarded to these appellants is liable to be commut-
ed to imprisonment for life. In support of his con-
tention, the learned Counsel has referred the case of
Pratt vs Attorney-General for Jamaica (1993) 4 All
ER 768, Henfield vs Attorney-General of Common-
wealth of Bahamas, 3 WIR (PC) 1079 and Guerra vs
Baptiste (1995) 4 All ER 583.

781. Pratt was convicted in Jamaica on a
charge of murder and sentenced to death. He applied
for leave to appeal within few days from his convic-
tion. There was delay of two years before hearing by
a Court of appeal of Jamaica of the application for
leave could be arranged due to delay in obtaining aid
and for other reasons. The appeal for leave was dis-
missed but no date was fixed for execution of sen-
tence. The rules in force in Jamaica laid down a
strict timetable for appeals to the Judicial Commit-
tee of the Privy Council and further provided that
execution would only be stayed so long as the time
table was adhered to, Furthermore, as per Jamaica’s
Constitution a written report of the case from the
trial Judge and the case record were required to be
submitted to the Jamaica Privy Council. Pratt wrote
to the Registrar of the Court of appeal asking for the
reasons why his application for leave to appeal was
dismissed. It had then transpired that no reasons
have been prepared because the papers have beet
misfiled and forgotten, The convict also petitioned
to the Inter American Human Rights for commula
tion of sentence. Then he applied to the United
Nations Human Rights Committee which requested


            
Jamaica not to carry out death sentence before the
committee had an opportunity to consider the com-
plaint but in the meantime Jamaican Privy Council
recommended that the State not to accede to the
request Thereafter the accused also obtained an order
of stay of execution from the Governor General. In
this way there was delay of about 12 years for execu-
tion of the sentence. Thereupon Pratt petitioned for
Constitutional redress under section 25(1) of the
Constitution claiming that his execution after such a
prolonged delay “would be inhuman punishment or
other treatment” and thus in breach of section 17(1)
of the Constitution. The Privy Council accepted his
plea and commuted the sentence to imprisonment for life on the following reasons:

“prolonged delay in carrying out a sentence
of death after that sentence had been passed
could amount to inhuman punishment or other
treatment contrary to section 17(1) of the
Jamaican Constitution irrespective of whether
the delay was caused by the shortcomings of the
State or the legitimate resort of the accused to
all available appellate procedures. A State that
wished to retain capital punishment had to
accept the responsibility of ensuring that execu-
tion followed as swiftly as practicable after sen-
tence, allowing a reasonable time for appeal
and consideration of reprieve and, if the appel-
late procedure enabled the prisoner to prolong
the appellate hearings over a period of years,
the fault was to be attributed to the appellate
system that permitted such delay and not to the
prisoner who took advantage of it.”

782. In Henfield, the convict was sentenced to
death for murder in 1988. The Court of appeal of the
Commonwealth of The Bahamas dismissed his
appeal and a warrant was read for his execution. He
thereupon obtained stay of execution from the
Judicial Committee. His leave petition was dis-
missed by the Judicial Committee. Thereafter he
applied to the Supreme Court of the Bahamas for a
declaration that the period of time for which he had
been held awaiting execution amounted to such a
delay as to constitute inhuman punishment contrary
to Article 17(1) of the Constitution of the Common-
wealth of The Bahamas. There was delay for about
5 years in the disposal of the proceeding up to the

Supreme Court. Thereafter a warrant for execution
was issued, The convict thereupon applied to the
Judicial Committee for leave to appeal on the simi-
lar ground of “inhuman or degrading punishment or
other treatment”, The Privy Council following
Pratt’: case commuted the sentence of death to
imprisonment for life observing as follows:

“They therefore reviewed the relevant con-
siderations, at pp. 34-35, and concluded that in
any case in which execution was to take place
more than five years after sentence there would
be strong grounds for believing that the delay
was such that execution thereafter would con-
stitute inhuman punishment contrary to section
17(1)”.

783. In Guerra’ case, the accused was con-
victed for murder in May, 1989 in Trinidad and
Tobago and was sentenced to death. He then applied
for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. The tran-
script of summing up at the appellant's trial was
available in February 1990 but there was consider-
able delay in transcribing the Judge’s notes of evi-
dence and the appellant’s lawyer was not notified
that they were available in May, 1993. The appeal
was ultimately heard in October, 1993 which was
dismissed in November. The appellant’s petition for
leave to appeal to the Privy Council was also dis-
missed and his execution was fixed on the following
day. The appellant thereupon filed a constitutional
motion alleging that his execution the next day pur-
suant to the warrant would constitute a violation of
his fundamental rights. The motion was heard and
dismissed. Thereupon he appealed to the Privy
Council contending that his execution after a delay
of 4 years 10 months, during which time he was on
death row was a “cruel and unusual punishment”
contrary to section 5(2)(b) of the Constitution of
Trinidad and Tobago and that giving him less than
17 hours’ notice of his execution was a breach of his
constitutional rights. The Privy Council on applying
the principles of “due process law” under common
law jurisdiction commuted his sentence to imprison-
ment for life, on applying the principles of Prams
case as under:

“Where a person was sentenced to death in

a common law jurisdiction, execution was

required to be carried out by the State as swift-

            
ly as practicable after sentence, allowing a rea-
sonable time for appeal and consideration of
nce under the common law a long-
ed execution was not in accordance with
the due process of law, In Trinidad and Tobago
such an execution, if not stayed, would consti-
tute a cruel and unusual punishment contrary to
section 5(2)(b) of the Constitution and would
not be in accordance with the due process of
law under section 4(a) of the Constitution.”

784. These principles are not applicable to our
Courts. The phrase ‘due process of law’ is synony-
mous with ‘law of the land’ as used in the famous
twenty-ninth chapter of ‘Magna Charta’ which
declared that “no freeman shall be taken, or impris-
oned, or dissiezed, or outlawed, or banished, or in
any way destroyed, nor will the king pass upon him
or commit him to prison, unless by the judgment of
his peers or the law of the land.” This principle has
been adopted in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amend-
ments of the American Constitution. Both these
amendments prohibit deprivation of life, liberty or
property ‘without due process of law’. The essence
of the concept is fairness and avoidance of arbitrari-
ness. These principles are being followed in Courts
of Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, The Bahamas.
Article 31 of our Constitution like the American due
process clause ensures fair procedure in any pro-
ceeding affecting rights and liberties of individuals
and this fairness concept is embodied in the princi-
ples of natural justice. The American and Caribbean
decisions may throw light in making the inquiry, but
the standard set by those Courts cannot be applied to
our Courts without careful evaluation of our laws,
economic and social conditions and values. Second-
ly, there are uniform decisions of our Superior
Courts that mere delay is not a legal ground for the
commutation of a sentence of death.

785. In the case of Furman vs State of
Georigea, Nos. 69-5003, 69-5030 and 69-5031 in
the Federal Supreme Court of USA the Judges were
invited to reject capital sentence on the ground that
it violated the Eight Amendment which forbade
‘cruel and unusual punishments’. Though the
leamed Judges by a majority set aside the sentence
of death, however, the three Judges namely Doug-
las, Stewart and White, JJ who formed majority with

Brennan and Marshall, JJ did not take the view
the Eight Amendment prohibited capital Punishmeny
for all crimes and under all circumstances, In our
Constitution there is no such provision like th ight
Amendment nor do we apply the test of reasonable.
ness with the freedom with which the Judges of
USA Supreme Court are accustomed to apply the
due process clause. We are dealing with punish,
ments for crimes as prescribed by law. This capita)
punishment cannot be termed as unusual because
this type of punishment has been with us from the
ancient times. Our Constitution recognised this pun-
ishment under the law.

786. Learned Attorney-General contends that
the delay in concluding hearing of the appeals is not
due to the laches of the State but it is, in fact, due to
the laches of the accused appellants. It is further
contended that most of the accused persons includ-
ing two appellants remained in abscondence
throughout the trial and the confirmation of the sen-
tence in the High Court Division and, as a result, the
lengthy procedures for hearing the reference in
absentia have been complied with. On perusal of the
record I noticed that no endeavour was ever taken on
the part of the appellants to dispose of the appeals
and the reference in the High Court Division. In this
Court also they did not take any step for early hear-
ing. It was the State which frequently prayed for fix-
ation of the hearing of the matters and on its prayer,
a Bench was constituted for hearing of the appeals.
The delay, in the premises, was not due to the lach-
es on the part of the State. Since the condemned
prisoners did not take any steps for hearing of the
death reference and their appeals at any point of
time, they cannot claim that they have been subject-
ed to “torture or to cruel, inhuman, or degrading
punislments or treatment” as a result of delay in car-
rying out sentences of death. Therefore, I find no
merit in the contention of the learned Counsels.
Normally this Court does not interfere with the dis-
cretion exercised by the High Court Division on the
question of sentence unless it is shown that the High
Court Division has disregarded the recognised prin-
ciples in imposing the sentence and there has been 4
failure of justice. The learned Sessions Judge has
assigned reasons for awarding the death sentence. It
has been observed that after the occurrence accused
appellants openly declared at home and abroad that

            
they killed Bangabandhu and other members of his
that the incident was a barbarous one, they
brutally killed two newly married women and a child
aged below 10 years and the wife of Bangabandhu
who were not in any way involved in political activi-
ties, that they had committed the offence of murder
against humanity, that the killing was not harmful to
individual but it was a loss to the nation, and that
ite accused persons in a planned manner committed
the heinous crime with their knowledge of the conse-
quence, for which, they did not deserve any special
sympathy in awarding the sentence.

787. The learned Sessions Judge has taken
into consideration the provisions of law and rightly
exercised his discretion in awarding the sentence.
The second learned Judge while maintaining the
sentence observed “in this case, 11(eleven) innocent
persons were brutally and diabolically murdered.
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the then President of
Bangladesh, became a target of vicious intrigue and
was murdered by a handful of disgruntled army offi-
cers, some of whom were dismissed. With him
10(ten) other persons including 3(three) ladies and
\(one) boy were also murdered. The manner in
which they were so brutally and mercilessly mur-
dered ripples any consideration of reduction of sen-
tence. As such, none of the accused deserves any
leniency in the matter of sentence”, It seems that the
leamed Judge is conscious about the requirement of
law and has maintained the sentence on assigning
reasons required by law.

788. Let us now consider the provisions of
law in case of awarding a sentence of death. The
provision contained in section 367(5) of the Code
reads as follows:

“(5) if the accused is convicted of an
offence punishable with death or, in the alterna-
tive, with imprisonment for life or imprison-
ment for a term years, the Court shall in its
judgment state the reasons for the sentence
awarded,”

789. This provision shows that it is left to the
discretion of the Court on the facts of each case to
Pass a sentence of death or a lesser sentence, and the
Court while awarding the sentence shall have to
assign reason. The Courts are principally concerned

with the facts and circumstances of the crime under
inquiry and decide whether there are aggravating or
mitigating circumstances to award a sentence of
death or life sentence. In India section 367(5) has
been reenacted in the Code of 1973. The correspon-
ding provision is provided in section 354(3) which
reads as follows:

“Section 354(3) when the conviction is for
a sentence punishable with death or, in the alter-
native, with imprisonment for life or imprison-
ment for a term of years, the judgment shall
state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and,
in case of sentence of death, the special reason
for such sentence”.

790. Under this new provision life sentence is
now the rule and it is only in exceptional cases, for
special reasons to be assigned, the death sentence
can be imposed. Our sentencing procedure is com-
pletely distinct from that of the India procedure. In
India a sentence of death can be imposed by a Court
in exceptional cases on assigning reasons for impo-
sition of such sentence. The constitutionality of
imposition of sentence has been challenged in Jog-
mohan Singh vs State of UP, AIR 1973 SC 947. It is
stated that the sentencing procedure and section 302
so far the imposition of death sentence are violative
of Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India. It
is urged that the law has given to the Judge a wide
discretion in the matter of sentence to be exercised
by him after balancing all the aggravating and miti-
gating circumstances of the crime and that no law
can deprive the life of a citizen unless it is reason-
able and in the public interest. It is further urged that
capital punishment cannot be regarded per se unrea-
sonable or not in public interest. Article 14 is simi-
lar to Article 27 of our Constitution and Article 19
corresponds to the combination of Articles 29, 36,
37 and 38 of our Constitution. Jogmohan & case was
reconsidered by a larger Constitution Bench in
Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab AIR 1980 SC 898.
It was urged that the sentencing procedure provided
in section 354(3) of the Code of 1973 is violative of
Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. Article 21
of the Indian Constitution is similar to Article 32 of
our Constitution. It was held by majority that the
procedure for sentencing does not violate Articles
14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution, It is said that for

            
making a choice of punishment or ascertaining the
existence or absence of ‘special reasons’ the Court
must pay due regard to both the erime and the crim-
inal, What is the relative weight to be given to the
ravating and mitigating factors depends on the
facts and circumstances of a particular case.

791. In India this onerous duty is cast upon Judges and for more than a century the Judges are carving out this duty under the Indian Penal Code. The impossibility of laving down standards is at the very core of the criminal law as administered in India which invests the Judges with a very wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment. That discretion in the matter of sentence is liable to be corrected by superior Courts. Laving down of standards to the limited extent possible as was done in the Model Judicial Code would not serve the purpose.
The exercise of judicial discretion on well recog-
nised principles is in the final analysis the safest
possible safeguards for the accused. It is further said
that there is no merit in the contention that uncon-
trolled and unguided discretion in the Judges to
impose capital punishment or imprisonment for life
is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution. If the Law
has given to the Judge a wide discretion in the mat-
ter of sentence to be exercised by him after balanc-
ing all the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
of the crime it will be impossible to say that there
would be at all any discrimination since facts and
circumstances of one case can hardly be the same as
the facts and circumstances of another. While exer-
cising the discretion Palekar, J . argued as follows:

In Jogmahan Singh case it is said that

“A large number of murders is undoubted-
ly of common type. But some at least are dia-
bolical in conception and cruel in execution, In
some others where the victim is a person of
high standing in the country, society is liable to
be rocked to its very foundation. Such murders
cannot simply be whisked away by finding ali-
bis in the social maladjustment of the murderer.
Prevalence of such crimes speaks, in opinion of
many, for the inevitability of death penalty not
only by way of deterrence, but as a token
emphatic disapproval by the society”,

792. What are the mitigating circumstances in
the exercise of Court’s discretion have been explain-

ed thus: (apthat the offence was committed under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional distur.
bance; (b)the age of the accused-if the accused js
young or old, he shall not be sentenced to de h;
(c)the probability that the accused would not com.
mit criminal acts of violence as would constitute 4
continuing threat to society; (d) in the facts and cir.
cumstances of the case the accused believed that he
was morally justified in committing the offence:
(e)the accused acted under duress or domination of
another person , and (f) the condition of the accused
showed that he was mentally defective and that the
said defect impaired his capacity to appreciate the
criminality of his conduct. In Jagmohan the follow-
ing circumstances are considered in mitigation of
punishment which should be inflicted such as (j)
absence of bad intention; (ii) provocation; (iii) self.
preservation; (iv) preservation of some near friends:
(v) transgression of the limit of self-defence; (vi)
submission to the menaces; (vii) submission to
authority; (viii) drunkenness; (ix) childhood.

793. In Bachan Singh's case, Bachan Singh
was convicted and sentenced to death under section
302 for murder of three persons. His sentence of
death was confirmed by the Punjab High Court. His
appeal by Special Leave came up for hearing before
a Division Bench. The leave was granted to consid-
er whether “the facts found by the Courts below
would be ‘special reasons’ for awarding the death
sentence as required under section 354(3) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure 1973”. The Division
Bench of the Supreme Court referred the matter to a
Constitutional Bench for a decision in regard to the
constitutional validity of death penalty for murders
provided in section 302 and the sentencing proce-
dure embodied in section 354(3) of the Code. The
Supreme Court by a majority maintained the sen-
tence of death observing as follows:

(c) The normal rule is that the offence of
murder shall be punished with the sentence of
life imprisonment. The Court can depart from
that rule and impose the sentence of death only
if there are special reasons for doing so. Such
reasons must be recorded in writing before
imposing the death sentence.

(d) While considering the question of sen-
tence to be imposed for the offence of murder

            
under section 302, Penal Code, the Court must
have regard to every relevant circumstance
relating to the crime as well as the criminal. If
the Court finds, but not otherwise, that the
offence is of an exceptionally depraved and
heinous character and constitutes, on account of
its design and the manner of its execution , a
source of grave danger to the society at large,
the Court may impose the death sentence.”

794. In Machhi Singh vs State of Punjab, AIR
083 SC 957, after considering Jagmohan’s case
and some other cases on the point of sentence, the
Supreme Court of India classified the cases in which
death penalty may be imposed as follows: “When
the victim of murder is (a) an innocent child who
could not have or has not proved even an excuse,
much less a provocation, for murder, (b) a helpless
woman or a person rendered helpless by old age or
infirmity, (c) when the victim is a person vis-a-vis
whom the murderer is in a position of domination or
trust, (d) when the victim is a public figure general-
ly loved and respected by the community for the
services rendered by him and the murder is commit-
ted for political or similar reasons other than per-
sonal reasons.”

795, In the murder case of Rajiv Gandhi, the
ex-Prime Minister of India, the Supreme Court of
India while maintaining the death sentence under
section 354(3) of the Code in the case of Nalini
(1999) 5 SCC 253, DP Wadhwa, J observed as fol-
lows:

“A former Prime Minister of the country
was targeted as this country had entered into an
agreement with a foreign country in exercise of
its sovereign powers. Rajiv Gandhi, being the
head of the Government at that time, was sig-
natory to the Accord which was also signed by
the head of the Government of Sri Lanka. The
Accord had the approval of.Parliament. It was
not that Rajiv Gandhi had entered into the
Accord in his personal capacity or for his own
benefit. Though we have held that object of the
conspiracy was not to commit any terrorist act
or any disruptive activity, nevertheless murder
of a former Prime Minister for what he did in
the interest of the country was an act of excep-
tional depravity on the part of the accused, an

unparalleled act in the annals of crime commit-
ted in this country. In a mindless fashion not
only was Rajiv Gandhi killed but along with
him others died and many suffered grievous and
simple injuries, It is not that intensity of the belt
bomb strapped on the waist of Dhanu was not
known to the conspirators as after switching on
the first switch on her belt bomb Dhanu asked
Sivarasan to move away. Haribabu was so keen
to have close-up pictures of the crime that he met
his fate in the blast itself. We are unable to find
any mitigating circumstance not (sic) to upset the
award of sentence of death on the accused.”

796. In the Indira Gandhi killing case, in
Kehar Singh's case (AIR 1988 SC 1883) similar ques-
tion was raised about the imposition of extreme sen-
tence of death in the context of section 354(3) of the
Code of 1973. The Supreme Court of India while
maintaining the death sentence of Kehar Singh and
Satwant Singh, GL Oza, J observed as follows :

“The person killed is a lady and no less
than the Prime Minister of this country who was
the elected leader of the people. In our country
we have adopted and accepted a system where-
in change of the leader is permissible by ballot
and not by bullet. The act of the accused not
only takes away the life of popular leader but
also undermines our system which has been
working so well for the last forty years. There is
yet another serious consideration. Beant Singh
and Satwant Singh are persons who were post-
ed on the security duty of the Prime Minister.
They are posted there is protect her from any
intruder or from any attack from outside and
therefore if they themselves resort to this kind
of offence, there appears to be no reason or no
mitigating circumstance for consideration on
the question of sentence. Additionally, an
unarmed lady was attacked by these two per-
sons with a series of bullets and it was found
that a number of bullets entered her body. The
manner in which mercilessly she was attacked
these two persons on whom the confidence was
reposed to give her protection repels any con-
sideration of reduction of sentence. In this view
of the matter, even the conspirator who inspired
the persons who actually acted does not deserve

            
any leniency in the matter of sentence. In our
opinion, the sentence awarded by the trial Court
and maintained by the High Court appears to be
just and proper.”

797. Our Appellate Division in the case of A.
Khair vs State, 44 DLR (AD) 225 held that delay
itself is not an extenuating circumstance to commute
the sentence, The observations are as under:

“Delay by itself in the execution of sen-
tence of death is by no means an extenuating
circumstance for commuting the sentence of
death to imprisonment for life. There must be
other circumstances of a compelling nature
which together with delay will merit such com-
mutation. We find no compelling extenuating
circumstance in this case and therefore, find no
ground whatsoever to interfere.”

798. According to our provision the Court has
been left with the discretion on the facts of the given
case whether or not a sentence of death should be
awarded, and in case of awarding a sentence of
death the Court is required to assign reason. The
Court is of course keeping in mind while awarding
the extreme sentence whether there is mitigating cir-
cumstances to exercise such discretion. The mitigat-
ing circumstances in the exercise of Court’s discre-
tion as analysed in Jogmohan’ case are undoubted-
ly relevant circumstance and might be given weight
in the determination of sentence.

799. There is no denial of the’fact the appel-
lants and other accused persons not only killed the
sitting President of the country, they killed the entire
family. The victim, the then President, who had sac-
rificed his life for the cause of the people his strug-
gle for the just and the democratic rights of the peo-
ple of the country was marked by extraordinary
patriotism. The liberation struggle of Bangladesh
from the treacherous occupation of the marauding
military ruler of Pakistan was a rare example of a
patriot was fought by the people from inside and
outside under order of Bangabandhu which was
clearly proclaimed in a historic public meeting on
7th March 1971. This historic speech not only pro-
claimed guidelines for action but also inspired the
deep determination of the people to fight for the
independence. He was determined on the creation of

independent Bangladesh and advanced strategical
through the Six-Point charter of demands. The six
points were later on led to one point the independ-
ence from which Bangabandhu did not retract,
Consequently we had achieved our independence.
The accused persons brutally killed such a leader,
who is none but the Father of the Nation. They even
did not spare a child, son of the President who was
below 10 years age. They killed him in such a bru-
tal manner the nation was shocked and dumbfound.
ed. There was no explanation why they also killed
three women. They committed the crime against
humanity by killing a child and three innocent
women who were unarmed. They eliminated almost
the entire family who were found in the house.
There is no explanation on the side of the accused as
to why they killed these innocent persons. The acts
of the accused was so barbarous which could only
be compared with orgies. The accused persons by
their barbarous act proved that the object of the con-
spiracy was not to oust the President from power,
but their object was to eliminate the entire family
and it was an act of exceptional depravity on the part
of the accused persons, an unparalleled act in the
annals of crime’ committed in the country. Although
there is no evidence against all the accused persons
of directly participating in the carnage but it should
be borne in mind that for the killing of the sitting
President, all the accused persons with a view to
attainment of the object played different roles.
Without jointly operating in concert the criminal
object could not have been executed. It was not pos-
sible to bring about the result of the criminal object
without support of all. In view of the matter, all the
conspirators who actually participated, acted in the
crime do not deserve any leniency in the matter of
sentence. On consideration of the brutality in the
commission of the offence, the appellants and other
co-accused do not deserve any leniency in the mat-
ter of sentence. The appellants failed to make out a
case of mitigating circumstance to commute their
sentence.

The sentence awarded to the appellants calls for
no inference by this Court. Accordingly, I affirm
their sentence.

Ed.
            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
MM Ruhul Amin CJ

Collector of Customs and

Md zul Islam J | others..............Appellants
Md Abdul Matin J vs

Md Abdul Aziz I Torx Git Refinery Ltd and 22
Judgment :

others. .. Respondents*

May 14th, 2009

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 103

New points —Since the points raised at leave
stage were not taken before the Court below, the
appellants cannot raise such points now—After
the bills of entry were presented considerable
time has elapsed. The prayer of the appellants
made at this belated stage to allow them to deter-
mine normal value of the goods would amount to
giving them highest latitude, though they, all
along, acted in violation of law and tried to
extract money from the respondents by fixing
“indicative value", is a foreign and unknown ter-
minology. seee(9)

Customs Act (IV of 1969)
Sections 25(1)(7), 30 & 79

Customs duty—The invoice value of the
respective imports did not reflect the value
prevalent in the international market. Appellants
are not authorised by an internal circular to fix
any value like indicative value of any imported
merchandise in advance for the purpose of

assessment of customs duties. 10)

Mahbubey Alam, Attorney-General, Naima Haider,
Deputy Attorney-General and Nahid Yesmen, Deputy

*Civil Appeal Nos. 08-30 of 2002.

(From the judgment and order dated 18-8-1998
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition
Nos.1704, 2304, 2305, 1935. 1564, 1172, 1155,1536, 1391,
1561, 1583, 2105, 1425, 1562, 2112, 1163. 1730, 1429,
1845, 2014, 2296, 2297, 2012 and 2015 of 1994).

Attorney-General with him) instructed by Mvi. Md

Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record —For the Appellant (In

all eases)

Fida M Kamal, Senior Advocate, instructed by ASM
Khalequzzaman, Advocate-on-Record and Aftab Hossain,
Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent (In CA No:

8,9, 24).

Joynul Abedin, Senior Advocate, instructed by
Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent
(In CA No.11, 14, 18, 19).

Joynal Abedin, Senior Advocate, instructed hy S

M Rahman, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent (In
CA No. 30).

Not represented — Respondents (In CA 10, 12. 13
15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29)

Judgment

Md Tafazzul Islam J : The above appeals. by
leave, are directed against the common judgment
and order dated 18-8-1998 of the High Court
Division passed in Writ Petition Nos. 1704, 2304,
2305, 1935, 1564, 1172, 1155, 1536, 1391, 1561,
1583, 2105, 1425, 1562, 2112, 1163, 1730, 1429,
1845, 2014, 2296, 2297, 2012 and 2015 of 1994
making absolute the Rules obtained impugning the
Circular dated 3-7-94 issued by the Controller,
Customs Valuation Division, the respondent No.4,
fixing the value of Crude Degummed Soybean Oil,
CDSO, and also Crude Palm Oil, CPO, as shown in
the above circular and also impugning the order,
dated 28-11-94 and 29-11-94 issued by the appellant
No.1 imposing duty based on the enhanced value of
USS 574.50 per metric tonne in terms of the above
Circular dated 3-7-94 in disregard of the invoice
value.

2. The respondent in Civil Appeal No. 8 of
2002 filed Writ Petition No. 2304 of 1994 on the
averments that they opened L/C dated 25-4-94 tor
import of 1000 metric tonnes of CDSO at the rate of
US $ 443 per metric tonne C&F Chittagong as
shown in the invoice and after arrival of the goods at

            
Chittagong Port they, through their Clearing and
Forwarding Agent, submitted bill of entry of 22-8-
1994 for the purpose of assessment of customs
duties and other taxes and charges on the basis of
invoice value but the appellant No.1 directed the
respondents to declare the value of the imported
goods @ USS 574 per metric tone fixed as the
indicative value of the goods by the Memo dated 3-
7-1994 and also to show separately the freight paid
for the purpose of assessment of customs duties.

3. The respondents in other appeals filed
respective writ petitions challenging similar orders
on the averments which are more or less similar.

4, The common contentions of the respon-
dents in the above writ petitions were that the above
circular and orders (a) are contrary to the provisions
of Customs Act, (b) the impugned orders made by
the Customs authority in different Nathies for the
purpose of assessment of customs duties were arbi-
trary (c) there was no objective basis of fixation of
the value of CDSO and CPO, imported by the
respondents for the purpose of assessment of cus-
toms duties (d) the customs officials acted illegally
in giving direction to the respondents to declare
value at a value which the authorities fixed at their
level without notifying the same in the Gazette, (e)
the National Board of Revenue, the appellant No. 2,
as well as customs officials, are not legally autho-
rised to fix value of a particular imported merchan-
dise in advance for the purpose of assessment of
customs duties, (f) the appellant No. 2 as well as the
customs officials acted in a colourable manner in
fixing the value in advance for the purpose of
assessment of customs duties which in other way
was nothing but the tariff value and, as such, the
value so fixed, having not been notified in the offi-

ial Gazette, the action of the customs authority of
ing the predetermined value as per circular dated
3-7-94 is illegal; (g) there being no law authorising
the appellant No. 2 as well as customs officials to fix
value of any imported merchandise as indicative
value in advance for the purpose of assessment of
customs duties, the action of the appellants in mak-
ing direction to the respondents to declare the said

indicative value is violative of Article 31 of the
Constitution,

5. The appellants filed affidavits-in-opposi.
tion in some of the writ petitions, which were useq
in all the writ petitions, contending that by the SRO
dated 9-6-1994, the tariff value on CDSO and Cpg
were deleted and even after the deletion of the tarifr
value the customs authority, in the absence of tariff
value, was competent to fix normal price of the
imported goods prevalent in the national and inter.
national markets under section 25(1) of the Customs
Act and in fixing the normal value by the Tax
Assessing Agency and the price shown in the
invoice was not binding upon the said agency and
the said circular dated 3-7-94 is an internal commu-
nication and the Customs Authority, being empow-
ered by the provisions of section 25(1) of the Act,
has fixed the normal price in advance; it is not cor-
rect that the current price of CDSO ranged from
USS 438 to 442 per metric tonne and for the purpose
of determination of normal price of CDSO and CPO
the appellants through their agencies, particularly
through Bangladesh Embassy in Malaysia, collected
price of CDSO which was at USS 574 per metric
tonne and taking into consideration the international
market price and the interest of the importers, busi-
ness communities and consumers, the Custoins
authorities fixed the indicative value of CDSO at
USS 575 per metric tonne and that when the bills of
entry were submitted there was no tariff value and
accordingly, the appellants did not commit any ille-
gality in giving the directions to the respondents to
declare the value of CDSO and CPO as mentioned
in the order made on the body of the bills of entry:
the object of fixing the price through the Circular
dated 3-7-1994 was to prevent under invoicing of
the value of the imported goods and accordingly. in
fixing the price circulated by the Circular dated 3-7-
94 the appellants acted quite fairly and reasonably in
exercise of their statutory power; further, it is alse
not correct that the respondents were not aware of
the above Circular dated 3-7-94 as they, against the
above circular, made representations to the appellant
No. 2 for reconsidering the value of CDSO and CPO


            
so fixed and they in their above representations
admitted that they imported some quantity of CDSO
at the rate of US$ 580/585 per metric tonne and, as
such, it was very much clear that the price fixed by
the appellant No. 2 was the prevalent price of the
CDSO and CPO in the international market; the
association of the respondents also had dialogue
with the appellants in connection with the fixing of
the price of the imported goods and they, by their
letter dated 16-7-94, represented to the appellant
No. 2 to reconsider the matter of lowering the value
of CDSO and CPO as shown in the Circular of 3-7-
94 and to allow the respondents to take delivery of
the oil imported by them on assessment of customs
duty on the basis of tariff value in respect of imports
where letters of credit were opened prior to the dele-
tion of the tariff value.

6. The respondents filed affidavit-in-reply
contending that the Government is not competent to
fix any price like the indicative price and whatever
price is fixed by the Government for the purpose of
assessment of customs duties the same is Tequired to
be notified through official Gazette; the price that
has been fixed as indicative value by Circular dated
3-7-94 has no nexus to the international market
price of the CDSO and CPO; the Circular dated 3-7-
94 being merely internal communication has no
legal sanction for assessment of customs duties at a
rate different from the invoice value or at a value
higher than the prevalent tariff value; the appellants
have obtained the price of CDSO from the countries
which are not regular exporting countries and, as
such, fixation of the price on the basis thereof can-
not be considered as a dependable basis; the respon-
dents imported the CDSO and CPO at a price which
was quoted by their exporter and the appellants have
not obtained the price of CDSO and CPO prevalent
in the countries like Brazil and Argentina where-
from the respondents imported the CDSO and CPO
and, as such, the price that has been relied upon in
the fixation of price of CDSO and CPO as circulat-
ed through the Circular dated 3-7-94 has no nexus
and bearing in the matter of fixation of the value of
CDSO and CPO imported by the respondents; fur-
ther, the respondents opened the letter of credit prior
to the fixation of the indicative value and, as such,
indicative value fixed subsequent to the opening of
letters of credit is in no way applicable to the matter
of assessment of customs duties of the oil imported
by the respondents.

7. The High Court Division, after hearing,
made the Rules absolute.

8. Mr Mahbubey Alam, the learned Attorney-
General appearing for the appellants in support of
the leave granting order, submitted that though the
appellants could not substantiate assessment on the
basis of indicative value as not being contemplated
under the Customs Act, but in terms of the provi-
sions of section 25(1) of the Customs Act in case of
disagreement with the invoice value the authority
was entitled to determine the normal price of the
imported goods and the High Court Division erred
in Jaw in not giving direction to assess the customs
duties and other taxes on the basis of normal price to
be determined in accordance with law considering
the prevalent market price at the country of origin
with an opportunity to the importers to produce any
paper or documents in support of their invoice val-
ues, inasmuch as the provisions of section 30 of the
Customs Act are applicable in respect of both the
value as well as rate of duty to any imported goods
on the date on which bill of entry is presented under
section 79 of the Act and, as such, the direction of
the High Court Division to make assessment on the
basis of the prevalent tariff value on the date of
opening of letter of credit, which stood deleted long
before the date of filing of the bill of entry, instead
of assessment of normal value of the import is not
sustainable and the finding of the High Court
Division that the respondents by opening of letter of
credit when tariff value was prevalent, acquired a
vested right of assessment on the basis of tariff, is
contrary to the principles as laid down in Mizunur
Rahman's case, 52 DLR (AD) 149 and further, the
Government has authority to determine the normal
prices and realise duty thereon at the rate prevailing
on the date of submission of the bill of entry.

            
9. The learned Counsel for the respondents
submitted that section 25 of the Customs Act, 1969
does not authorise the appellants to issue the circu-
lar dated 3-7-1994 and the same has been issued
arbitrarily and without lawful authority as section 25
envisages determination of normal value under sec-
tion 25(1) or fixation of tariff value by notifying
through Gazette under section 25(7) and does not
provide for determination of any "indicative value"
as done in the present case and the appellants did
not also make an attempt to determine normal
value under section 25(1) of the Act based on any
authentic. contemporary evidence upon notifying
the importer; further, since the points as raised in
the leave stage had not been taken before the Court
below, the appellants cannot raise such new points
now; after the bills of entry were presented consid-
erable time has already elapsed in the meantime
and, as such, the prayer of the appellants made at
this belated stage to allow them to determine nor-
mal value of the goods would amount to giving the
appellants highest latitude though they, all along,
acted in violation of law and tried to extract money
from the respondents by fixing "indicative value"
which is a foreign and unknown terminology; the
invoice value/C&F value of the goods imported by
the respondents being US$ 354 per metric tonne,
the customs duty and other taxes thereon should be
assessed on the basis of invoice value since there
was no tariff value on the date of presentation of
the bills of entry; the Circular dated 3-7-1994 and
orders dated 28-11-1994 and 29-11-94 have been
made without lawful authority, inasmuch as the
value sought to be fixed for assessment of customs
duties and other taxes on the said imported goods
is arbitrary and without lawful authority and there
is no authority conferred by section 25 to deter-
mine any ‘indicatiye value! by a circular as has
been done in the present case and section 25 of the
Customs Act did not authorise the appellants to
issue the impugned circular, inasmuch as section
25 only authorises to fix tariff value to be deter-
mined and fixed by Gazette notification under sec-
tion 25(7) and does not provide for any authority to
determine the value of imported goods by any cir-
cular.

10. As it appears, the High Court Division
made the Rules absolute holding that a reading of
the provisions of section 25(1)(2)(3) and section
30(1) of the Customs Act show that the Customs
Authority is authorised to assess customs duties of
imported goods at the value prevalent on the date
when the bill of entry is presented for assessment of
customs duties but, in the present case, the Customs
authority fixed the indicative value for the purpose
of assessment of customs duties of the imported
CDSO and CPO imported by the respondents long
before the presentation of the bill of entry and
accordingly, "indicative value", that has been fixed
by the circular dated 3-7-94, cannot be considered to
have been fixed in the light of the provisions of sec-
tion 25(1)(2) and (3) of the Customs Act and that in
terms of the above section the Customs Authority, in
appropriate cases, no doubt, is competent to fix nor-
mal value of imported goods upon rejection of the
invoice value or the declared value but in such a
case the Customs authority would be required to
notify importers informing them that the Customs
authority is not accepting the invoice value or
declared value as the basis for the purpose of assess-
ment of customs duty and is going to fix the normal
price of the imported goods for the assessment of
customs duties and the customs authority would also
be required to afford an opportunity to the importers
to place their cases, if any, in support of their claim
that the invoice value, in fact, is the normal price of
the imported merchandise for the purpose of assess-
ment of customs duties or that as against the
invoice/ declared value of the imported goods the
customs authority is going to tax the normal price of
the goods for the purpose of assessment of customs
duties but, in the instant case, that has not been done
by the customs authority and the Customs authority
fixed, through internal circular, certain prices of
CDSO and CPO for the purpose of assessment of
customs duties terming the same as "indicative
value" but under the Customs Act, the revenue real-

            
ising Authority or the Customs Authority is autho-
rised to fix tariff value under section 25(7) of the Act
at a prior date through Gazette notification for the
purpose of a ment of customs duties and the
indicative value that has been fixed later on and cir-
culated through Circular dated 3-7-94 was admitted-
ly not notified in the official Gazette; the learned
Attomey-General submitted that the fixation of nor-
mal value in every case of imports upon notifying
the individual importer would be an impossible task
and, as such, for the sake of convenience, the rev-
enue authority has fixed the value of the imported
merchandise at a prior date through the Circular
dated 3-7-94 for making the same as the basis for
assessment of the customs duties in disregard of the
invoice value, but the above submission cannot be
accepted because in fixing the citizen with the lia-
bility of payment of tax, the concerned authority is
required by strict compliance of law authorising it to
fix a citizen with the liability of payment of tax and
the plea of impossibility of fixation of the normal
value of the imported merchandise in the case of
each individual importer upon hearing him or that
upon affording him an opportunity to place his case,
if any, in support of the invoice value, cannot be
accepted and the respondents, under the law, cannot
be allowed to resort to the practice of pre-fixation of
the value of the imported goods for assessment of
customs duties in that the Government or any other
agency authorised by the delegated legislation can-
not act in a manner which is not authorised or pro-
vided in the law or by the law; further, the affidavit
of the appellant does not show that price to the
CDSO and CPO at which those were sold by the
countries wherefrom import was made by the
respondents, being not taken into consideration at
the time of fixing the "indicative value", the state-
ment of the appellants in Annexure-2 to the affi-
davit-in-opposition to the effect that the price of
CDSO in the international market at the relevant
time was at about US$ 580/585 per metric tonne
, and, in that state of the matter, the appellants were
quite correct in fixing the value of the goods in ques-
tion at the amount circulated through the Circular

94, cannot be accepted and in no way it
can be said that the invoice value of the respective
imports did not reflect the value prevalent in the
international market and, be that as it may, the fact
remains that appellants, by law or under the law, are
not authorised by an internal circular to fix any
value like indicative value of any imported mer-
chandise in advance for the purpose of assessment
of customs duties. The High Court also did not
accept the submissions of the learned Attorney-
General that, in terms of the principle laid down in
PLD 1988 Karachi 99, the matter of assessment of
customs duties of the goods in question be sent back
to the customs authority for making assessment after
hearing the respondents as the facts of the above
case are quite distinguishable from the facts of the
instant cases.

Il. As it appears, at the conclusion, the High
Court Division directed that the customs authority is
to assess the customs duties of the goods in respect
of which the letters of credit were opened prior to
the deletion of the tariff value by the SRO dated 9-
6-1994 on the basis of tariff value prevalent at the
time of opening of letters of credit and in other cases
taking the invoice value but the above order of the
High Court Division to the extent that "in other
cases taking the invoice value" is modified to the
extent, that if the invoice value as shown by the
respondents are not acceptable to them the Customs
Authority will be at liberty to fix normal price in
terms of the provisions of section 25(1) of the
Customs Act in accordance with law and then assess
customs duty and other duties on the basis of normal
price so fixed.

All the appeals are dismissed with the observa-
tion as made above.

Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Md Fazlul Karim J University of Dhaka and

Md Joynul Abedin J | others......... Appellants
SAN Mominur Rahman J vs
Md Jalal Uddin Chow-
dhury and others.........
.Respondents*

Judgment
March 17th, 2009

Dhaka University Order (PO No. 11 of 1973)
Articles 45(4)(5), 52 & 56(3)

The order of termination is not a termination
simpliciter but is with stigma. The order of ter-
mination is malafide in view of the attending
facts and circumstances of the case. Once a per-
son is appointed as Lecturer on being recom-
mended by a legally constituted committee and
the subsequent committee being not a superior
authority cannot sit over and review the same. As
the respondent No. 1 had already joined the post
and worked as Lecturer, a legal right has accrued
to him and this right cannot be taken away in
such an arbitrary manner.

Controller of Examinations, University of Dhaka vs
Mahinuddin 44 DLR (AD) 305 ref.

Dr Rafigur Rahman, Senior Advocate instructed by
Md Nawab Ali, Advocate-on-Record—For the Appellants,

Dr Md Abul Bashar, Advocate instructed by
Mahmuda Begum, Advocate-on-Record—For Respondent
No. 1.

None represented—Respondent Nos. 2-5.

Judgment
Md Fazlul Karim J: The appeal by leave is
directed against the judgment and order dated 23-
11-2000 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No. 4786 of 1999 making the Rule absolute.
*Civil Appeal No. 249 of 2003.

(From the judgment and order dated the 23rd day of
November, 2000 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No. 4786 of 1999).

2. The facts involved in the case, in short, are
that the respondent No. | as petitioner upon obtain-
ing Master Decree was appointed as Lecturer of
Dhaka City College in the Department of Islamic
History. Subsequently, in response to an advertise-
ment made by the Dhaka University he applied for
the post of Lecturer in the Department of Islamic
History and Culture; out of 10 applicants the rele-
vant committee recommended the names of 3 appli-
cants including the respondent for the said post. At
that time one Dr Ibrahim, Associate Professor of
Department of Islamic History, made a frivolous
objection regarding the respondent No. 1 on
appointment. Thereafter, selection committee on the
basis of C and D Committee selected the respondent
No. | in the post of Lecturer and referred the matter
to the Syndicate for taking final decision regarding
his appointment in view of the complaint made by
an Associate Professor. The Syndicate formed an
inquiry committee but failed to submit any report
within the stipulated time. As a result, the Syndicate
formed another committee, which after discussion,
took the view that the allegation of adopting unfair
means in the subsidiary examination against the
respondent would not be deemed to be a bar for his
appointment and accordingly, recommended the
respondent for appointment and exonerated him
from the complaint made by said Dr Ibrahim, an

Associate Professor. Thereafter, the appointment let-
ter was issued. On receipt of the appointment letter
the respondent No. 1 resigned from the post of
Lecturer of Dhaka City College and submitted his
joining letter with respondent No. 2 which was
accepted. While the respondent No. 1 was serving
as a Lecturer in the University, the respondent No. 2
on the basis of news published in the newspaper
formed another committee for further inquiry.
Thereafter, the respondent No. 1 was served with a
show cause notice to which the respondent No. I
replied, then a new inquiry committee was formed
by the Syndicate and the said committee served
another show cause notice upon the respondent No.
| to which he replied. The respondent No. 1 was
then asked not to participate in Departmental func-
tion till disposal of the inquiry. The inquiry com-

            
mittee gave a report and an opinion regarding, his
appointment and forwarded the same to the Syndi-
cate to take a final decision. He then received impug-
ned letter issued by the respondent No. 2 stating,
inter alia, that the service of the respondent No. 1
was no longer required i.e. his service has been ter-
minated in accordance with the appointment letter,

3, Leave was granted to consider the submis-
sions of the learned Counsel for the appellants that
Article 52 of the Dhaka University Order, 1973
(President's Order 11 of 1973) provides that :

"52(1)—An appeal against the order of any
officer or authority of the University affecting
any person or class of persons in the University
may be made by petition to the Chancellor who
shall send a copy on receipt of the petition
thereof to the officer or authority concerned,
and shall give such officer or authority an
opportunity to show cause why the appeal
should not be entertained. But the respondent
No. 1 without invoking and exhausting the
alternative forum of appeal as provided in the
aforesaid Article 52 of the University Order,
1973, filed the writ petition and in view of the
decision of the Appellate Division passed in the
case of Controller of Examinations, University
of Dhaka vs Mahinuddin reported in 44 DLR
(AD) 305, the instant writ petition is not main-
tainable and the remedy lies in an appeal to the
Chancellor under Article 52 of PO 11 of 1973."

4. Dr Rafiqur Rahman, learned Counsel,
appearing for the appellants, submitted that Article
52 of the Dhaka University Order, 1973 (President's
Order 11 of 1973) providing an appeal against the
order of any officer or authority of the University
affecting any person or class of persons in the
University may be made by petition to the
Chancellor who shall send a copy on receipt of the
petition thereof to the officer or authority concerned,
and shall give such officer or authority an opportu-
nity to show cause as to why the appeal should not
be entertained. But the respondent No. 1 without
invoking and exhausting the alternative forum of
appeal as provided in the aforesaid Article 52 of the

University Order, 1973, filed the writ petition and in
view of the decision of the Appellate Division
passed in the case of Controller of Examinations,
University of Dhaka vs Mahinuddin reported in 44
DLR (AD) 305, the instant writ petition is not main-
tainable and the remedy lies in appeal to the
Chancellor under Article 52 of PO 11 of 1973. The
learned Counsel further submitted that the High
Court Division failed to take into consideration that
the respondent No. 1 has no /ocus standi to file the
writ petition in violation of procedure contained in
the Dhaka University Order, 1973 (PO 11 of 1973).
The learned Counsel also submitted that the High
Court Division failed to take into consideration that
as per clause-2 of the appointment letter dated 11-5-
1997 of the respondent No. 1, appointing authority
i.e. the University, reserves the legal right to termi-
nate the service of the respondent No. | and the
appellants by the impugned order terminated the
service of the respondent No. | as per said clause-2
of the appointment letter of the respondent No. |
and, as such, the judgment and order of the High
Court Division is liable to be set aside for the ends
of justice. The learned Counsel finally submitted
that from the plain reading of the impugned order of
termination it will be abundantly clear that the same
is a simple order of termination simpliciter without
any stigma and, as such, the judgment and order of
the High Court Division is liable to be set aside for
the ends of justice.

5. Dr Abul Bashar, leaned Advocate, appear-
ing for the respondent No. 1, submitted that once a
person is appointed as a Lecturer on being recom-
mended by a legally constituted enquiry committee
and the subsequent enquiry committee, being not a
superior authority, has no jurisdiction to review the
decision of the earlier committee; that the very con-
stitution of the subsequent committee and all its
activities are ultra vires and malafide and do not
come within the purview of Article 53(3) of the
Dhaka University Order, 1973; that an order of te
mination with stigma of misconduct or order of di:
missal can only be made on the grounds as laid
down in Article 56(3) of the Dhaka University
Order, 1973 and a Tribunal must have been constituted


            
in accordance with section 45(4) of the First
Statutes of Dhaka University Order, 1973 but in the
instant case the appellants had neither shown any
grounds nor constituted any tribunal as per the rele-
vant law. The leamed Advocate further submitted
that as per section 45(5) of the First Statutes of
Dhaka University Order, 1973 an appeal lies to the
Chancellor against any order passed by the Syndi-
cate on the recommendation of the Tribunal but not
against any order passed by the Syndicate on the
recommendation of the so-called enquiry committee
and, as such, the ground taken by the appellants with
regard to the non-exhaustion of the alternative
forum of appeal is not tenable in the eye of law; that
Article 52 of the Dhaka University Order, 1973 pro-
vides that the provision for appeal before the
Chancellor against any order of an officer or author-
ity of the University, which is not relevant in the
instant matter. In fact, the relevant provision in the
instant matter is provided in section 45(5) of the
First Statutes of Dhaka University Order, 1973,
which lays down that an appeal lies to the Chancel-
lor against any order passed by the Syndicate on the
recommendation of the Tribunal but no such, tribu-
nal was set up by the appellants as per section 45(4)
of the First Statutes of Dhaka University Order,
1973. The learned Advocate further submitted that
the respondent No.1 duly joined the post of Lecturer
and performed his responsibilities without any fault,
therefore, a legal right has been accrued to him and
this right cannot be taken away in such an arbitrary
manner. The learned Advocate finally submitted that
the order of termination is not a termination sim-
pliciter but it is with a stigma of misconduct and
therefore, the impugned termination order does not
come within the ambit of condition No. 2 of the
appointment letter.

6. It appears that subsequent committee has no
authority to review the earlier decision. It appears
that the order of termination is not a termination
simpliciter but is with stigma. From the argument of
the learned Counsel it appears that the order of ter-
mination is malafide in view of the attending facts
and circumstances of the case, It appears that once
a person is appointed as Lecturer on being recom-
mended by a legally constituted committee and the
subsequent committee being not a superior authori-
ty cannot sit over and review the same. As the
respondent No. | had already joined the post and
worked as Lecturer, a legal right has accrued to him
and this right cannot be taken away in such an arbj.
trary manner. The decision reported in 44 DLR (AD,
305 has no manner of application in the attending
facts and circumstances of the case.

7. The High Court Division held that

"As we have already observed that subse.
quent committee has no authority to review the
earlier decision. It appears that the order of ter.
mination, we find, is not a termination sim.
pliciter but it is with stigma, so the argument of
Mr AJ Mohammad Ali is that the order of ter-
mination is malafide in view of the attending
facts and circumstances of the case which can-
not be ignored. The question of malafide is
rather a disputed fact but what we find from the
facts and circumstances of the case is that the
argument of malafide is rather established and
cannot be altogether brushed aside. It appears
that once a person is appointed as Lecturer on
being recommended by a legally constituted
committee and the subsequent committee being
not a superior authority cannot sit over and
review the same as we have already considered.
Furthermore, the petitioner having joined the
post and worked as such a legal right has
accrued to him and this right cannot be taken
away in such an arbitrary manner. We, there-
fore, find substance in the Rule and the order of
termination of the petitioner is liable to be
declared as illegal and without lawful authority
and is of no legal effect. The petitioner is, there-
fore, entitled to be reinstated with all benefits of
back wages and maintaining his seniority. The
respondents are hereby directed to comply with
the judgment of this court forthwith."

8. In view of the above, we find no substance in
the submissions of the learned Counsel for the
appellants.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed without
any order as to costs.

Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
Md Abdul Matin J | Anti-Corruption Commis-
ABM Khairul Haque J] sion «Petitioner
MM Hossain J

SK Sinha J

Judgment
March 14th, 2010

ATM Nazimulla
Chowdhury and others
Respondent:

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102(2)(a)(ii)
penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 409
prevention of Corruption Act (11 of 1947)
Section 5(2)
Criminal Law Amendment Act (XL of 1958)
Section 4

Fugitive has no /occurs standi to file any peti-
tion .The petitioner is a fugitive from justice
when he moved the petition and obtained the
Rule Nisi. This Court repeatedly argued that a
fugitive from justice is not entitled to obtain a
judicial order defying the process of the Court.
When a person wants to seek remedy from a
Court of law, he is required to submit to the due
process of the Court and unless he surrenders to
the jurisdiction of the Court, the Court will not
pass any order in his aid.

The learned Judges of the High Court Division ille-
gally entertained the writ petition and stayed further pro-
ceedings of the case. The order of stay passed by the
learned chamber Judge will continue till the disposal of
the rule. The writ petitioner is directed to surrender before
the Special Judge, Court No.9, Dhaka within 6(six) weeks
from date failing which, the learned Special Judge shall
take proper steps for the apprehension of the writ peti-

tioner. This petition is disposed of with the above obser-

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No.411 of 2009.

(From the judgment and order dated 12-11-2008
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.8601
of 2008)

vations and direction. Let a copy of the order be commu-
nicated to the learned Judges of the High Court Division

and the leaned Special Judge, Court No.9, Dhaka....(9-10)

Anti-Corruption Commission vs Dr HBM_ Iqbal
Alamgir, 15 BLC (AD) 44 ref.

Md Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate. instructed by

Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record.

Rafique-ul-Huq, Senior Advocate, instructed hy Mvi
Md Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respon-

dents.

Judgment

SK Sinha J: This petition for leave to appeal is
directed against an interim order dated 12th
November, 2008, of the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No.8601 of 2008 issuing Rule and making
interim order staying all further proceedings of
Special Case No.26 of 2008 pending before the
Special Judge, Court No.9, Dhaka.

2, The respondent filed the aforesaid, writ
petition challenging the initiation and continuation
of the proceedings in Special Case No.26 of 2008
corresponding to Metropolitan Special Case No.139
of 2008 arising out of ACC GR Case No.71 of 2008
and Shahbagh PS Case No.27 dated 14th May, 2008,
under section 409 of the Penal Code and section
5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
pending before the Special Judge, Court No.9,
Dhaka. Abdullah-al-Zahid, a Deputy Director of the
said Commission i.e. the respondent No.3 lodged an
Ejahar on 14th May, 2008, with the Shahbagh Police
Station against the writ petitioner for offences pun-
ishable under section 409 of the Penal Code and sec-
tion 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
alleging, inter alia, that during his tenure as the
Ambassador of Bangladesh to the United Arab
Emirates in September, 2006, he rented a house in
Abu Dhabi City by exercising thereby caused the loss of total 72,000 Dirham from the public exchequer. The writ petitioner also mis-
appropriated total sum of 34,150 Dirham, which
was drawn from the Government of Bangladesh as
the salary of two gardeners of the Embassy of
Bangladesh namely Md Jewel and Selim Parvez.
The writ petitioner submitted false bill of Taka
$0,149 for purchasing certain house-hold materials
of Bangladesh Embassy, which were in fact pur-
chased for use in his residence. The writ petitioner
paid 5,000 Dirham every month as the bill of his res-
idence from the official account of the Embassy of
which he was supposed to pay from his own pocket.

32 The Shahbagh police registered the FIR
as Shahbagh Police Station Case No.27 dated 14-5-
2008, corresponding to ACC GR Case No.71 of
2008. The said Commission vide Memo No. qv faz
Bye TE 2 fH oov s8vev dated 21st August,
2008, accorded sanction for submitting charge sheet
against the writ petitioner in the said case.
Thereafter, the investigating officer submitted
Charge Sheet No.336 dated 28th August, 2008,
against the writ petitioner under sections 409/418 of
the Penal Code and section 5(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947 which was accepted by the
Court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka.

4. Thereafter, the Court of Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka transferred the said
case to the Metropolitan Special Judge, Dhaka. The
Metropolitan Special Judge, Dhaka vide order No.1
dated 3rd September, 2008 took cognizance of the
offences under section 409 of the Penal Code and
section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947 against the writ petitioner, The said case was
renumbered as Metropolitan Special Case No.139 of.
2008, Thereafier the learned Metropolitan Senior
Special Judge, Dhaka transferred the case to the
Coun of Special Judge, Court No.9, Dhaka wherein
the said case was registered as Special Case No.26
of 2008, The Special Judge, Court No.9, Dhaka vide
order dated 15th January, 2008, framed charge
against the writ petitioner and examined 6(six) pros-
tion witnesses and the next date of the case was
fixed on 9th November, 2008, for examination of
the rest the prosecution witness:

5. At this stage the writ petitioner moved
the High Court Division and obtained the Rule with
an interim order of stay.

7. Mr Md Khurshid Alam Khan, the
learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
High Court Division erred in law in entertaining the
writ petition and staying all further proceedings o,
the case in failing to consider that the writ petition.
er was fugitive from justice when he moved the peti-
tion and thus he was not entitled to any relief. In this
connection the learned Counsel has referred the case
of Anti-Corruption Commission vs Dr HBM Iqbal
Alamgir, 15 BLC (AD) 44.

8. Mr Rafique-ul-Hugq, on the other hand,
contends that since the Government has recom-
mended for withdrawal of the case from the prose-
cution against the writ petitioner, no fruitful purpose
will be served if the order of the High Count
Division is interfered with.

9 In the writ petition the petitioner stated
that he is "presently being in abroad is not in a posi-
tion to swear the Affidavit of the instant writ peti-
tion. The petitioner through a Power of Attorney
dated 11-9-2008 authorized his son namely Samir
Chowdhury to file this Writ Petition before this
Hon'ble Court and for taking all necessary step in
connection herewith". The petitioner is a fugitive
from justice when he moved the petition and
obtained the Rule Nisi. This Court repeatedly
argued that a fugitive from justice is not entitled to
obtain a judicial order defying the process of the
Court. When a person wants to seek remedy from 3
Court of law, he is required to submit to the duc
process of the Court and unless he surrenders to the
jurisdiction of the Court, the Court will not pass any
order in his aid. In view of the above, the learned
Judges of the High Court Division illegally enter
tained the writ petition and stayed further proceed
ings of the case. The order of stay passed by the
learned chamber Judge will continue till the dispos-
al of the rule, The writ petitioner is directed to sut-
render before the Special Judge, Court No.9, Dhaka
within 6(six) weeks trom date failing which, the

            
learned Special Judge shall take proper steps for the
apprehension of the writ petitioner,

This petition is disposed of with the above
observations and direction, Leta copy of the order
be communicated to the learned Judges of the High
Court Division and the leaned Special Judge, Court
No.9, Dhaka.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)

MM Ruhul Amin CJ] Anti-Corruption Commis-
Md Fazlul Karim J | sion ........eescseed Petitioner
Md Tafazzul Islam J
Joynul Abedin J
Md Hassan Ameen J
Md Abdul Matin J

Judgment
June 19th, 2008

vs

Sigma Huda and another......
ealsasaggeaeesyents Respondents*

Criminal Law Amendment Act (XL of 1958)
Section 10

Emergency Power Rules, 2007
Rule 11(2)

The High Court Division has correctly fol-
lowed the observations made by this Division in
Criminal Appeal No. 6 of 2008 in granting bail to
the respondent No.1. The appeal could not be
disposed of within ninety days and the respon-
dent has already served out a substantial portion
of sentence. aeeee(9e10)

Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate instructed by Mrs
Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record.

Rafique-ul-Hug, Senior Advocate (Ajmalul Hassain
QC, Senior Advocate with him) instructed by Syed

*Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No.269 of
2008.

(From the judgment dated 3-6-2008 passed by the
High Count Division in Criminal Appeal No.4813 of 2007).

Mahbubur Rahman, Advocate-on-Record — For the

Respondent No.1,

Not Represented — For the Respondent No.25

Judgment
Md Abdul Matin J : This petition for leave to
appeal is directed against order dated 3-6-200%
passed by the High Court Division in Criminal
Appeal No.4813 of 2007 granting ad-interim bail to
the respondent No.1.

2. The facts, in short, are that the present
respondent No.1 was put on trial before the Special
Judge No.2, Dhaka who found the respondent guilty
under sections 161/109 of the Penal Code and sen-
tenced her to suffer simple imprisonment for
3(three) years by the judgment and order dated 26-
8-2007.

3. On 22-3-2007 the Deputy Director of the
Anti-Corruption Commission lodged an FIR with
Dhanmondi Police Station against the respondent
No.1 and Barrister Nazmul Huda and the said case
was registered as Dhanmondi Police Station Case
No.70 dated 21-3-2007 under section 5(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 read with sec-
tions 26 and 27 of the Anti-Corruption Commission
Act, 2004 and section 109 of the Penal Code alleg-
ing, inter alia, that the informant has been working
as an enlisted contractor with the Roads and
Highways Department under the Ministry of Com-
munications since 1988 and received S(five) work
Orders from the Ministry of Communications on 14
December, 2004, 10 March 2005, 22 January, 2004
(two work orders) and 04 November, 2004 respec-
tively. Upon receiving the above mention 3 (five)
work orders Mir Zahir Hossain went to the then
Communications Minister Mr Nazmul Huda's house
and personally paid him altogether Taka 2,40,00,000
(taka two crore and forty lac) in three cheques as
bribe for the said work orders on 12 February 2005
and 21 April 2005 respectively. Out of the said sum
of Taka 2,40,00,000 (taka two crore and forty lac)
amounting Taka 1 crore and another cash cheque


            
amounting Taka 40,00,000 (Taka forty lac only) was
deposited in the account of a weekly publication
called "the Khoborer Ontoraley" owned by the
respondent No.1 on 17th February 2004 and 23rd
April 2004 respectively. Subsequently she withdrew
the said amount of Taka 2,40,00,000 (taka two crore
and forty lac only) from her account through differ-
ent cheques and opened two fixed deposits for her
two daughters, Taka 50 lac each. In light of the
above Mr Nazmul Huda and respondent No.1 com-
mitted an offence under section 5(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 sections 26 and
27 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2004
and section 109 of the Penal Code read with section
15 of Emergency Power Rules, 2007.

35 The matter was taken up for investiga-
tion and after investigation, the investigation officer
submitted a charge sheet dated 4-6-2007 against the
respondent No.1 under sections 109 and 161 of the
Penal Code.

4. After submission of charge sheet the
case was ultimately sent to the Court of Metropoli-
tan Special Judge, Court No.1 Dhaka where the case
was registered as Metropolitan Special Case No.27
of 2007. The learned Judge of the Metropolitan
Special Court took cognizance against her and trans-
ferred the case to the Special Court No.2, Dhaka
where the case was renumbered as Special Case
No.2 of 2007. On receipt of the case the learned
Judge of Special Court No.2 framed charge against
the accused petitioner under sections 161/109 of the
Penal Code.

6; The prosecution examined as many as 40
witnesses and defence examined 8 witnesses.

6. Having being convicted the respondent
preferred Criminal Appeal No.4813 of 2007 before
the High Court Division and also prayed for bail and
by the impugned judgment and order the High Court
Division was pleased to grant bail to the respondent
No.1. 
Being aggrieved by granting of bail to
the respondent No.1 the Anti-Corruption Commis-
sion has filed this petition for leave to appeal.

8. Heard the learned Advocate and perused
the petition and the impugned judgment and order of
the High Court Division and other papers on record,

9. It appears that the High Court Division
has correctly followed the observations made by this
Division in Criminal Appeal No.6 of 2008 in grant.
ing bail to the respondent No.1.

10. It further appears that the appeal could
not be disposed of within ninety days and the
respondent has already served out a substantial per-
tion of sentence.

11. We do not find that the judgment and
order of the High Court Division suffers from any
infirmity.

Accordingly the petition is dismissed.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Md Fazlul Karim J | Chan Miah (Md)

Md Joynul Abedin J | ........ joner
SAN Mominur vs
Rahman J Md Dabirul Islam Khan @
Judgment Muku Miah .
March 12th, 2009. Respondents*

State Acquisition & Tenancy Act (XXVIII of 1951)
Section 96 :

Pre-emption law provides four months time
for filing an application for pre-emption from the
date of knowledge and that any opposite party in
the pre-emption case is permitted to file an appli-
cation for adding him/her as an co-applicant with
prayer for rateable preemption of the land with-
in two months and is required to deposit the
amount. (Ss)

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 729 of 2008.

(From the judgment and order dated 20-5-2007
passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No-
3872 of 2004).

            
Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan, Senior Advocate, instructed
by M Khaled Ahmed, Advocate-on-Record For the
Petitioner.

Munsur Habib, Advocate, instructed by Md Zainul
Abedin, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent No. 1.

Judgment
SAN Mominur Rahman J: This application for
Jeave to appeal is against the judgment and order
dated 20-5-2007 passed in Civil Revision No. 3872
of 2004 by the High Court Division making the Rule
absolute.

2. The application is time barred. The expla-
nation given for the delay of 15 days in filing appeal
appears to be not satisfactory, hence the delay is not
condoned.

3. We have also considered the petition on
merit. Leave has been prayed for filing appeal
against the judgment and order dated 20-5-2007
passed in Civil Revision No. 3872 of 2004 by the
High Court Division discharging the Rule, which
was issued calling in question the judgment and
order dated 26-7-2004 passed in Civil Revision No.

4 of 2004 by the learned District Judge,
Moulvibazar, making the Rule absolute setting aside
the judgment and order dated 12-2-2004 passed in
Miscellaneous Case No. 47 of 2003 (Pre-emption)
by the Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Moulvibazar.

4. The aforesaid Miscellaneous Case arises out
of application filed under section 96 of the State
Acquisition and Tenancy Act in the Court of
Subordinate Judge, 2nd Court, Moulvibazar, regis-
tered as Miscellaneous Case No. 2 of 2001, which
on transfer has been registered as Pre-emption
Miscellaneous Case No. 47 of 2003 in the Ist Court
of Joint District Judge, Moulvibazar. The pre-emp-
tor filed the pre-emption case claiming to be con-
tiguous landholder of the land covered by registered
sale deed dated 29-1-200] executed by the opposite
party Nos. 2-6 in favour of opposite party No. 1of
the said Miscellaneous Case. The opposite party
No. 7 being co-sharer by inheritance on receipt of
notice from Court filed application under section 96
(4) of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act on 29-
5-2001 to become co-applicant praying for rateable
pre-emption in the case land.

5. The learned Subordinate Judge on considera-
tion of the application allowed the prayer of the
opposite Party No. 7 vide order No. 25 dated 4-6-
2001 subject to deposit of the consideration money
together with the compensation amount within 17-6-
2001 and also ordered for modification of the suit
register by including the name of the opposite party
No. | as co-applicant after submission of the chalan
showing deposit of the money, in default the appli-
cation for co-pre-emptor shall be deemed to have
been rejected. The said opposite party No. 7 failed
to comply with the order, he however took exten-
sions of time, from time to time, and by filing Civil
Revision No. 3977 of 2001 in the High Court
Division obtained a Rule and an order of stay of
operation of the said order No. 25 dated 4-6-2001 of
the Court below vide order dated 22-6-2001. The
opposite party No, 7 claimed in the Civil Revision
Case before the High Court Division that there is no
provision for making statutory deposit before the
final determination of the share ‘of the co-applicant
in the pre-emption case filed under the State
Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 and that, after
hearing, the said rule. was discharged. Z

6. Being aggrieved’ there against Said opposite
party No. 7 unsuccessfully moved the Appellate
Division in civil petition for leave to appeal No. 328
of 2003 filed against the judgment and order dated
5-5-2003. Thereafter the said opposite party No. 7
on 19-5-2003 deposited Taka 1,65,000 through cha-
lan and filed an application in the trial Court for
adding him as Co-applicant, which was rejected,
since no deposit w thade'i in terms and order passed
on 4-6-2001 and against that the said opposite party
No. 7 moved the” strict Judge under revisional
jurisdiction in Civil Revision No. 14 of 2004 and on
contest the Rule was made absolute setting aside the


            
order of the Court below and hence the pre-emptor
moved the High Court Division in Civil Revision
No. 3872 of 2004, wherein Rule was issued and on
contest the Rule has been discharged by the
impugned judgment and order, Hence the leave peti-
tion.

7. We have perused the leave petition and heard
the learned Advocate, who, amongst others, submit-
ted that under the provisions of section 148 of the
Code of Civil Procedure the Court has ample power
to extend the time for deposit of the consideration
money and accordingly the required amount has
been deposited within the extended time allowed by
the Court, which aspect has not been considered by
the High Court Division, and thus arrived at an erro-
neous decision and that the High Court Division
erred in holding that the limitation provided for pre-
emption under section 96 of the State Acquisition
and Tenancy Act, is a special provision and accord-
ingly held that the deposit not being made within
time allowed, there is no scope to extend such time
and deposit made is not legal and that the High
Court Division arrived at an erroneous decision
since failed to appreciate the observation of the
Appellate Division made on 5-5-2003 in Civil
Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 328 of 2003 and
thus the decision of the High Court Division has
occasioned failure of justice.

8. We have perused the judgment passed by the
Appellate Division referred to above as well as the
orders passed by the trial Court and the learned
District Judge as well the impugned judgment and
order. We have also perused the provisions of sec-
tion 96 of the State Acquisition and Tenancy Act, It
appears that the provision for pre-emption under the
State Acquisition and Tenancy Act is a special law
and specific time frame has been given for making
application for pre-emption. There is also provision
for making the application to become co-applicant
praying for rateable pre-emption of land subject to
deposit of money as may be directed by the Court,
on an application to be filed by an applicant. In the

instant case an application was file by the opposite

party No. 7 and the trial Court allowed the prayer of
the opposite party No, 7 to become a co-applicant

subject to deposit of the consideration money
together with the statutory compensation amount
within 17-6-2001, in default the application for co.
applicant shall be deemed to have been rejected. and
that the said opposite party No. 7 failed to deposit
the amount within time allowed. He, however, took
extensions of the time on several occasions and ulti-
mately he moved the revisional jurisdictions of both
the District Judge and the High Court Division in
due course and obtained orders of stay of operation
of the order passed by the trial Court for deposit of
money and being unsuccessful ultimately moved the
Appellate Division, which refused to interfere with
the judgment and order of the High Court Division
vide judgment and order dated 5-5-2003. The pre-
emption law provides four months time for filing an
application for pre-emption from the date of knowl-
edge and that any opposite party in the pre-emption
case is permitted to file an application for adding
him/her as an co-applicant with prayer for rateable
pre-emption of the land within two months and is
required to deposit the amount, as may be ordered
for, within the period allowed by the Court and, such
provision is mandatory inasmuch as this special pro-
vision of law provides special limitation and there-
fore the limitation as provided in the law itself shall
prevail over the normal law of limitation.

9. It appears that an application for pre-emp-
tion is allowed to be filed within four months, there-
by the submission that the time for deposit of money
by co-applicant may be extended at least beyond
four months, fixed by the special law for filing the
main application for pre-emption, cannot be con-
ceived of. In the instant case the opposite party No.
7 was directed to deposit the amount within 17-6-
2001 but ultimately he deposited amount on 19-5-
2003, of course by obtaining extensions and there-
after by obtaining order of stay from the Courts con-
cerned. However the deposit was not made within
the time allowed and accordingly the order for making

            
the opposite party No. 7 as co-applicant stood
rejected for non-compliance of the order dated 4-6-
2001 passed by the learned Subordinate Judge, now
Joint District’ Judge, in the —Pre-emption
Miscellaneous Case No. 47 of 2002. Thus we do not
find any merit in the application.

Accordingly, the application for leave to appeal
is dismissed. '

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Md Fazlul Karim J | Sonali Bank

Md Joynul Abedin J etitioner
SAN Mominur ve
Rahman J | Artha Rin Adalat & others
Judgment

Respondents*

April 12th, 2009

Artha Rin Adalat Ain (vii! of 2003)
Section 33(5)

At the instance of the decree holder-bank
auction was held and ultimately the decree-hold-
er-bank has withdrawn the money deposited by
the auction purchasers. After the auction process
is completed, proceeding with the execution case
is redundant.

MA Sobhan, Advocate instructed by Nurul Islam
Bhuiyan, Advocate-on-Record—For the Petitioner.

Not represented—Respondents.

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1529 of 2008.

(From the judgment and order dated 17-4-2007
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 687
of 2005)

Judgment
SAN Mominur Rahman J: This leave petition is
directed against the judgment and order dated 17-4-
2007 passed in Writ Petition No. 687 of 2005 by the
High Court Division discharging the Rule.

2. The Rule arises out of an order dated 2-]-
2005 and 9-1-2005 passed in Mortgage Execution
Case No. 8 of 1995 by the Artha Rin Adalat,
Narayanganj, rejecting the application for cancella-
tion of the auction bid held on the date i.e. on 2-1-
2005 and acceptance of the highest bid amount of
Taka 9,04,000 directing deposit of the balance auc-
tion-bid amount through pay order on 12-1-2005
and the order rejecting the review petition filed
against the order dated 2-1-2005 and also an appli-
cation filed on 4-1-2005 by the decree-holder-bank
for issuing certificate under section 33(5) of the
Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 canceling the auction.
The writ petitioner bank filed the Title Suit No. 262
of 1992 (Artha Rin) in the Court of learned Sub-
ordinate Judge and Artha Rin Adalat No. 1, Dhaka,
for recovery of Taka 32,45,037.81 as of 30-9-1992
with 20% interest till realization and the suit was
decreed ex-parte on 28-11-1993, pursuant to which
the writ-petitioner bank filed an application for
drawing up of the final decree permitting sale of the
mortgage property and accordingly a final decree
was passed and drawn up on 30-5-1994 and there-
after the writ petitioner filed Mortgage Execution
Case No. 8 of 1995 for execution of the decree.
Thereafter auction notice was published in "The
Dainik-al-Muzadded" and in "Dainik Ittefaq" invit-
ing bid against the sale of the mortgaged property
worth Taka 25,00,000 and on 2-1-2005 bids against
tender were received, in which the highest bid
amount was Taka 9,04,000 and as the bid amount
was exorbitantly low the writ-petitioner bank filed
an application for cancelling the auction which was.
refused and the said bid was accepted by the Court.
Being aggrieved, the writ petitioner filed an applies
tion for review of the order dated 2-1-2005 and also
filed an application for issuing certificate as per section


            
 33(5) of the Artha Rin Adalat Ain, 2003 in
favour of the writ petitioner bank to vest the proper-
ty in its favour and name but the aforesaid two appli-
cations were refused and thus being aggrieved the
writ-petitioner bank challenged the aforesaid orders
dated 2-1-2005 and 9-1-2005 in the writ petition,
wherein, the rule was issued. Thereafter, the High
Court Division by its judgment and order dated 17-
4-2007 discharged the Rule observing, amongst oth-
ers, that:

"the petitioner bank has already withdrawn
the sale proceeds and since the sale has been
confirmed by the executing Court and sale cer-
tificate has already been issued, the title of the
property has already been vested upon the auc-
tion purchaser."

3. The High Court Division also observed that
earlier the Rule was discharged for default as no one
appeared on 22-5-2006 and the order of stay grant-
ed earlier was vacated and the executing Court was
directed to proceed with the execution case in accor-
dance with law and that on the prayer of the peti-
tioner bank the writ petition was restored to its orig-
inal file and number on 15-6-2006 recalling the
default order dated 22-5-2006 but it appears from
the order sheet of Execution Case No. 8 of 1995
annexed to the leave petition the order relating to
restoring of the Rule was not communicated to the
Court below and that an application was filed in the
Executing Court for proceeding with the execution
case on 4-7-2006 pursuant to which the Executing
Court proceeded with the execution proceeding.
Being aggrieved, the writ petitioner bank filed the
leave petition.

4. The learned Advocate appearing for the writ
petitioner bank submitted that the orders relating to
auction sales were passed by the Executing Court
inspite of the order of stay granted by the High
Court Division being in force inasmuch as the Rule
issued in Writ Petition No. 687 of 2005 though dis-
charged on 22-5-2006 for default but the same was
restored on 15-6-2006 and, as such, the order passed

by the Executing Court after 15-6-2006 are without
lawful authority, hence the order relating to confir-
mation of auction sale is without lawful authority,

5. We have perused the writ petition as well ay
the order dated 2-1-2005 and 9-1-2005 passed in
Mortgage Execution Case No. 8 of 1995 and the
Judgment and order passed in the writ petition ang
considered the submission made by the learneq
Advocate appearing for the leave petitioner. {,
appears that the leave petitioner bank is negligent jn
not informing the executing Court about the fact of
restoration of the rule and stay dated 15-6-2006 and
that the leave petitioner bank by filing an applica-
tion on 25-6-2006 prayed for receiving the pay order
submitted by the auction purchaser in Court and it
appears from the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High court Division that the leave
petitioner bank has already encashed the pay order
and thereby accepted the auction sale. In view of
the provision of law to the effect that once an auc-
tion sale is complete no relief is available against
such auction sale but the mortgagee may proceed
against the mortgagor bank for any compensation, if
it is proved that there was illegality in the auction
sale. In the instant case, it is not such case rather it
appears that at the instance of the decree-holder-
bank auction was held and ultimately the decree-
holder-bank has withdrawn the money deposited by
the auction purchasers. After the auction process is
completed, proceeding with the execution case is
redundant.

6. Thus we do not find any illegality in the
impugned judgment passed by the High Court
Division.

Accordingly, the petition for leave to appeal is
dismissed.

Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)

Md Fazlul Karim C} | Habibur Rahman Mollah
MA Matin J (Ex-Member of Parliament,
ABM Khairul Haque 3] Dhaka 4) ......... Appellant

SK Sinha J

Indgment
April 4th, 2010

vs
State and another.
sayeTANETOR TE Respondents*

Code of Criminal Procedure (Vv of 1898)
Section 561A
Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Sections 26 & 27

Whether the appellant has disproportionate
wealth, he has concealed his known source of
income, there is mis-joinder of charges and the
trial of the appellant on facts allegedly commit-
ted prior to the promulgation of Durnity Daman
Commission Ain, 2004 constitute an offence
under the Durnity Daman Commission Ain are
disputed facts can only be decided on evidence at
the trial.

Code of Criminal Procedure (Vv of 1898)
Section 561A

Inherent power of the High Court Division is
generally exercised where no other remedy is
available for obtaining justice in the cause-it
should not be invoked where another remedy is
available. This power has not been vested upon
the High Court Division where another remedy is
available, This is an extraordinary power and is
exercised in extraordinary circumstances in the
interest of justice.

*(Criminal Appeal No. 5 of 2009.

(From the judgment and order dated 20-11-2008
passed by the High Court Division
Miscellaneous Case No. 11212 of 2008).
in Criminal
The case reported in 61 DLR 1 has been affirmed by the above judgment.

Code of Criminal Procedure (y of 1898)
Section 561A
The inherent power of the Court is unde-
fined and indefinite and, as such, it must be exer-
cised very sparingly and with great caution.
(10)
Section 561A
The provisions of the Code provide that the
administration of criminal justice should be
allowed to proceed in the usual manner without
interruption. If the High Court Division inter-
feres with the case in the midst of the trial it will
have to set up a wrong precedent by which
instead of the cause of justice being advanced
had really been stifled.

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Sections 26 & 27
Code of Criminal Procedure (Vv of 1898)
Section 561A

Since the prosecution case is almost over
and the appellant put his defence by cross-exam-
ining the witnesses, in view of the consistent
views of the superior Courts of this sub-continent
that the High Court Division which exercising its
power under section 561A of the Code should not
usurp the jurisdiction of the trial Court. ...... (4)

MS Khawaja vs State, PLD 1965 SC 287 = 17 DLR
SC 153; Md Shamsuddin @ Lambu vs State, 40 DLR
(AD) 69; Jairam Das vs Emperor, AIR 1945 PC 94:
Emperor vs Nazir Ahmed, AIR 1945 PC 18; Abdul
Quader Chowdhury vs State, 28 DLR (AD) 38:
Hossain Khan vs State, 29 DLR (SC) 101; Mofazzal
Hossain Mollah vs State, 45 DLR (AD) 175; TS Baliah vs
TS Rangachari, AIR 1969 (SC) 701; Md Nizamuddin vs
State, 30 DLR 49(FB); Abul Kalam Khan vs R
Morshed, 5 BLC 2000; State of Delhi vs Gyan Devi, AIR
2001 SC 40; Amar Chand Agarwala vs Shanti Bose AIR
1973 SC 799 and RP Kapur vs State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866 ref.



            
Rafique-ul-Hug, Senior Advocate (with Azmalul
Hossain, OC (Senior Advocate), instructed by AKM

Shahidul Hug, Advocate-on-Recond—For the Appellant,
Md Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record—For the

dent No. 1.

Ma Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate (with MA Aziz
4dvocate) instructed by Zahirul Islam, Advocate-
"or the Added Respondent No. 2.

Judgment

SK Sinha J: The appellant Habibur Rahman
Mollah, ex-member of Parliament, submitted his
statement of wealth including the members of his
family to the Durnity Daman Commission in pur-
suance of its letter under memo dated 29th May,
2007 directing him to submit as such. The Commis-
sion upon scrutiny for his wealth statement having
suspected the statement as not true, made a thorough
enquiry and it was said that he had concealed his
wealth and submitted a falls return and that he had
acquired property worth Taka 2 crore and odd by
corrupt means. Accordingly an officer of the Com-
mission lodged an first information report with the
Ramna Police Station on 3rd October, 2007 against
him for alleged commission of offences punishable
under sections 26(2) and 27(1) of the Durnity
Daman Commission Ain, 2004 read with Rule
15Gha (5) of the Emergency Powers Rules, 2007.
The Commission investigated into the matter and
having allegedly found disproportionate to the
appellant's known source of income was of the opin-
ion that he had committed offence punishable under
the said provisions of law and accordingly submit-
ted a police report re-commending for prosecution
of the appellant under the aforesaid provision on
20th April, 2008.

2. The case record was eventually sent to the
Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka for put-
ting the appellant on trial where Special Case No. 10
of 2008 was registered. Learned Special Judge after
taking cognizance of the offences framed charge

against the appellant under sections 26(2) and 270,
of the Durnity Daman Commission Ain on 14th
May, 2008. The appellant pleaded not guilty ang
claimed to be tried. The prosecution examined 17
witnesses out of 25 witnesses cited in the Police
report and the appellant thoroughly cross-examined
them. It is at this stage the appellant came up wit)
an application for quashing of the proceedings of the
case before the High Court Division. The learned
Judges of the High Court Division by judgment ang
order dated 20th November, 2008 discharged the

_ Tule, Thereafter the appellant moved this Division 4

leave petition, This Division granted leave to con-
sider the following points:

"the Anti-Corruption Commission Act,
2004 came into effect on and from 9-5-2()4
and unless any complaint, investigation,
enquiry, filing of case or sanction were com-
menced or were pending under the Anti-Cor-
ruption Act, 1957 or the Anti-Corruption
(Tribunal) Ordinance, 1960, the complaint,
investigation, enquiry, filing of case or sanction
cannot be tried under the Anti-Corruption
Commission Act, 2004 as they do not come
within the transitional provisions contained in
section 38 thereof inasmuch as the provision of
section 27(1) has been wrongly applied in the
facts and circumstances of the case and the
High Court Division committed an error of law
contrary to Article 35(1) of the Constitution in
failing to consider that some of the alleged acts
relied upon in the first information report
charge sheet and the charge frame order of the
trial Court, were committed between 1971 and
9-5-2004 i.e. before enactment of the Anti-
Corruption Commission Act, 2004."

3. Mr Rafique-ul-Huq and Mr Azmalul Hos-
sain extensively argued on behalf of the appellant on
the point of jurisdiction of the Special Judge to hold
trial of the offence punishable under section 26(2)
and 27(1) of the Durnity Daman Commission Ain.
2004 over an occurrence alleged to have been com-
mitted from 1971 to June 2007, Their main con-

            
tention is that the Anti-Corruption Ain came into
force on 9th May, 2004 but the alleged occurrence
took place long before coming into force of the said
Ain and institution of the case for alleged offences
committed prior to coming of the aforesaid Ain with
retrospective effect is totally illegal and without
jurisdiction, In this connection learned Counsel
have referred certain provisions of the Anti-Corrup-
tion Act, 1957, the Durnity Daman Commission
Ain, 2004, relevant rules of Durnity Daman
Commission Rules, 2007, section 6 of the General
Clauses Act and Articles 31 & 35(1) of the
Constitution.

4. Before the High Court Division it was argued
on behalf of the appellant that the enquiry into the
matter having been made ignoring sub-rules (1), (2)
& (5) of the Durnity Daman Commission Rules,
2007 the case was instituted in violation of Rules. It
was further urged that no proper sanction was
obtained in accordance with section 32(1) of the
Durnity Daman Commission Ain, 2004 read with
Rule 15(7) of the Dumity Daman Commission
Rules and since the sanction was given in a mechan-
ical way; it was not a sanction in the eye of law. It
was further urged that there was mis-joinder of
charges, inasmuch as, the offences alleged to have
committed from 1971 to June 2007 and thus, there is
violation of section 234 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. The last point was raised is that the trial
having not been concluded within the prescribed
period of limitation the continuation of the proceed-
ing is a sheer abuse of the process of the Court.

5. The learned Judge of the High Court
Division having found no substance to points can-
vassed discharged the rule on the reasoning that the
period of limitation for enquiry or investigation as
provided in the Durnity Daman Commission Ain
and the Rules framed thereunder were directory in
nature, that the time limit provided in Rule 10 of the
Durnity Daman Commission Rules for conclusion
Of investigation and section 6A of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1958 for conclusion of trial are
directory in nature, that there was no violation of

law that the sanction for prosecution of the appellant
was given in accordance with law and that there was
no misjoinder of charges.

6. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division considered the points agitated meticulous-
ly and disposed of all the points on assigning prop-
er reasons. The learned Judge thereupon concluded
by observing the case is now at that stage where
good number of witnesses have been examined, and
cross-examined, as such we do not find any urged to
invoke our inherent jurisdiction to quash the pro-
ceeding of this count" and discharged the rule on the
reasoning that quashment of the proceeding at this
belated stage cannot be entertained. The learned
Judge of the High Court Division have considered
the pros and cons of the matter and found that it is
not a fit case for invoking its jurisdiction under sec-
tion 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The
High Court Division gave convincing reasons while
discharging the rule.

7. Before framing charge the appellant moved
an application under section 241A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure for the discharge. The learned
Special Judge by his order dated 14th May, 2008
rejected the application and framed charge. The
appellant did not take any exception against the said
order of framing charge by rejecting his application
under section 241A and surrendered to the jurisdic-
tion of the Special Judge. He could have moved the
High Court Division a revision petition against that
order if he was at all aggrieved against the order of
framing charge. Admittedly the appellant moved
the High Court Division after examination of 17
prosecution witnesses. As noticed, the learned
Counsel appearing for the appellant had totally
given a go-bye to the points agitated before the High
Court Division and tried to make out a third case in
this Division.

8. The word 'process' is a general word meaning
in effect anything done by a Court, "Abuse of the
process of the Court" is generally applied to a case
or proceeding which is wanting in bonatides and is
frivolous or vexatious. Inherent power of the High

            
Court Division is generally exercised where no
other remedy is available for obtaining justice in the
cause-it should not be invoked where another reme-
dy is available. This power has not been vested upon
the High Court Division where another remedy is
available. This is an extraordinary power and is
exercised in extraordinary circumstances in the
interest of justice. This power is controlled by the
principles and precedents as are its express statutory
powers. The provisions of the Code provide that the
administration of criminal justice should be allowed
to proceed in the usual manner without interruption.
If the High Court Division interferes with the case in
the midst of the trial it will have to set up a wrong
precedent by which instead of the cause of justice
being advanced had really been stifled.

9. The Superior Courts of this sub-continent
have settled the scope and power of the High Court
Division to quash a proceeding by invoking its
inherent power under section 561A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. Inherent jurisdiction of the
High Court Division can be exercised in a proper
case to quash proceedings ‘to secure the ends of jus-
tice’. Ordinarily criminal proceedings instituted
against an accused should have been tried under the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and
the High Court Division is always reluctant in inter-
fering with the said proceedings at an interlocutory
stage by invoking its power. In this connection I
would like to reiterate the arguments made by the
Supreme Court of Pakistan in MS Khawaja vs State,
PLD 1965 SC 287 = 17 DLR SC 153 as under :

"Every prosecution for a criminal offence
is to be deemed to have been commenced and
continued in the public interests, as a duty of the
State. It can only be in a very rare case that a
superior Court acting under its inherent power
‘to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice, would
deem it appropriate to act so as to place an
alleged offence outside the operation of the
criminal law, on incidental grounds, such as that
of delay, or for any reasons other than reasons

going to the question whether the allegation js
sufficient to constitute an accusation of an
offence in law............ To quash a judicial
proceeding in order to secure the ends of justice’
would involve a finding that if permitted to con-
tinue, that proceeding would defeat the ends of
justice, or in other words, would either operate
or perpetuate an injustice. To find an ‘abuse’ jt
would be necessary to see in the proceeding’ a
perversion of the purpose of the law such as to
cause harassment to an innocent party, to bring
about delay, or where the machinery of justice
is engaged in an operation from which no result
in furtherance of justice can accrue, and similar
perverse results."

10. In Md Shamsuddin @ Lambu vs State, 40
DLR (AD) 69, it has been argued by Shahabuddin
Ahmed, J that this power "may be exercised only in
those cases which are not covered by any specific
provision of the Court. The inherent power of the
Court is undefined and indefinite and, as such, it
must be exercised very sparingly and with great cau-
tion". Similar views have been expressed in the
State of Uttar Pradesh vs Mohammad Naim, PLD
1964 SC 703 as under:

"It is now well settled that the section con-
fers no new powers on the High Court. It mere-
ly safeguards all existing inherent powers pos-
sessed by a High Court necessary (among other
purposes) to secure the ends of justice. The sec-
tion provides that those powers which the Court
inherently possesses shall be preserved lest it be
considered that the only powers possessed by
the Court are those expressly conferred by the
Code and that no inherent powers had survived
the passing of the Code (see Jairam Das vs
Emperor, AIR 1945 PC 94 and Emperor vs
Nazir Ahmed, AIR 1945 PC 18)."

11. In Amar Chand Agarwala vs Shanti Bose
AIR 1973 SC 799, the charges were framed by the
Chief Presidency Magistrate in presence of the
accused. Several prosecution witnesses had been
examined and at that stage one of the accused per

            
son moved a petition for quashing the proceedings.
The Calcutta (Kolkata) High Court quashed the pro-
ceeding. The Supreme Court interfered with the
judgment of the High Court on the arguments that
the accused did not move the Court at the earliest
stage When the Magistrate had issued process, Nor
had the accused approached the High Court when
the charges were framed. On consideration of the
materials the Magistrate framed charged against all
the accused. It was observed that if the case of the
accused was that the allegations in the complaint do
not constitute the offence complained of or that the
complaint has to be quashed for any ground avail-
able in law, they should have approached the High
Court, at any rate, immediately after the charges
were framed. PB Gajendragadkar, J, argued for the
Supreme Court then observed as under :

"It has been emphasised that the inherent
jurisdiction could be exercised to quash pro-
ceedings in a proper case, either to prevent the
abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise
to secure the ends of justice. This Court has also
indicated some of the categories of cases where
the inherent jurisdiction could and should be
exercised to quash proceedings. However the
exercise of the power by the High Court in the
case before us, does not come within the ambit
of the principles laid down by this Court in the
above decision. For instance the second con-
tention taken before the High Court by the
accused related to the maintainability of the
second complaint when the first complaint had
been withdrawn and the accused had been dis-
charged. If the High Court had accepted the
contention of the accused in that regard it may
be that the High Court was justified in quashing
the proceedings though at a very late stage. But
on that point, the High Court's decision is in
favour of the complainant. The other points
taken into account by the High Court do not jus-
tify the exercise of its power under section
561A and that too at a very late stage of the pro-
ceedings."

12. These views have been argued following the
dictum in RP Kapur vs State of Punjab, AIR 1960
SC 866. The arguments made by PB Gajendragad-
kar, J, in the said case have been endorsed in verba-
tion by Ahsanuddin Chowdhury J, in Abdul Quader
Chowdhury vs State, 28 DLR (AD) 38. In this case
it has been reiterated that the inherent jurisdiction
should not be invoked where some other remedy is
available. The jurisdiction given by section 561A is
not an alternative or an additional jurisdiction but it
is a jurisdiction preserved in the interest of justi
redress grievances for which no other procedure is
available or has been provided by the Code. This
power cannot be utilized as to interrupt or divert the
Ordinary Course of Criminal Procedure.

po

13. In State of Delhi vs Gyan Devi, AIR 2001 SC
40, the accused persons stood charged under sec-
tions 302/34 of the Penal Code and thereafter five
witnesses were examined on behalf of the prosecu-
tion and at that stage, the prosecution filed an appli-
cation intimating the Court that it had no other med-
ical evidence to be adduced in the case other than
that was proved by Dr VV Gupta (PW 3). Under
such circumstances the accused persons filed an
application for their discharge. The prayer was
rejected by the trial Court. A Single Judge of the
Delhi High Court quashed the order of framing
charge against the accused person found on sifting
the evidence of PWs 1-4 in the light of the autopsy
report. Question arose before the Supreme Court
was whether the learned Judge of the High Court
was justified in invoking inherent power at this late
stage of the proceeding. The Supreme Court in the
facts of the given case interfered with the order of
the High Court on the reasoning that the High Court
exceeded its jurisdiction and observed as under:

"The High Court has erred in its approach
to the case as if it was evaluating the medical
evidence for the purpose of determining the
question whether the charge under sections
304/34, IPC framed against the accused respon-
dents 1 and 2 was likely to succeed or not. This
question was to be considered by the trial Judge

            
after recording the entire evidence in the case.
It was not for the High Court to pre-judge the
case at the stage when only a few witnesses
(doctors) had been examined by the prosecution
and that too under the direction of the High
Court in the revision petition filed by the
accused. The High Court has not observed that
the prosecution had closed the evidence from its
side, There is also no discussion or observation
in the impugned order that the facts and cir-
cumstances of the case make it an exceptional
case in which immediate interference of the
High Court by invoking its inherent jurisdiction
under section 482, CrPC is warranted in the
interest of Justice. On consideration of the mat-
ter we have no hesitation to hold that the order
under challenge is vitiated on account of erro-
neous approach of the High Court and it is
clearly unsustainable."

14. Since the prosecution case is almost over
and the appellant put his defence by cross-examin-
ing the witnesses, in view of the consistent views of
the superior Courts of this sub-continent that the
High Court Division which exercising its power
under section 561A of the Code of Criminal
Procedure should not usurp the jurisdiction of the
trial Court, the learned Judges have acted in accor-
dance with Jaw. The powers under this provision
have been vested in the High Court Division to
quash a proceeding to prevent the abuse of the
process of the Court but that power cannot be exer-
cised to hold a parallel trial only on the basis of the
allegations made in the first information report, the
police report and the documents collected during the
enquiry or investigation of the case for the purpose
of expressing an opinion whether the accused is
likely to be punished if the trial is allowed to pro-
ceed. It will be for the trial Court to examine
whether on the evidence to be adduced by the pros-
ecution it is established that the accused has dispro-
portionate to his known source of income or that he
has committed an offence by concealment of and/or
suppression of wealth as per provisions of Durnity
Daman Commission Ain, The Court is required to

look into the allegations made in the first informa-
tion report that whether the same discloses any
offence or not. If the allegations do not disclose an
offence the High Court Division is perfectly justi-
fied in invoking its inherent power on the reasoning
that the continuation of the proceeding is a sheer
abuse of the process of the Court.

15. Whether the appellant has disproportionate
wealth, whether he has concealed his known source
of income, whether there is mis-joinder of charges
and whether the trial of the appellant on facts
allegedly committed prior to the promulgation of
Durnity Daman Commission Ain, 2004 constitute
an offence under the Durnity Daman Commission
Ain are disputed facts can only be decided on evi-
dence at the trial. This is not a case that the allega-
tions as disclosed in the first information report and
the police report do not disclose any offence. If
accepting the allegations made and charges levelled
on their face value, the Court had come to the con-
clusion that no offence was disclosed, the matter
would have been different. In view of the above, |
am of the view that there is no legal impediment to
proceed with the trial of the case.

16. As regards the decisions cited by the
learned Counsel in Akhtar Hossain Khan vs State.
29 DLR (SC) 101, Mofazzal Hossain Mollah vs
State, 45 DLR (AD) 175 and TS Baliah vs TS
Rangachari, AIR 1969 (SC) 701, Md Nizamuddin vs
State, 30 DLR 49(FB), Abul Kalam Khan vs Riza
Morshed, 5 BLC 2000, 1 am persuaded not to make
any observation as to the applicability of these deci-
sions at this stage of the proceedings. The appellant
would be entitled to raise the statements of law
argued in those cases in the trial Court.

17. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division, in the premises, are perfectly justified in
refusing to exercise their inherent power in the facts
and circumstances of the case. The submissions of
the learned Counsel merit no consideration.

The appeal is dismissed.
Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Md Fazlul Karim J | Majeda Khatun and others...
Md Joynul Abedin seen Appellants.
SAN Mominur

Rahman J

Judgment
June 24th, 2009

Vs

Jiban Nessa and others.
Respondent

Remand

It is now well settled that the remand orders
are not to be made as a matter of course. The
High Court Division as a revisional Court is
required to properly appreciate the relevance of
the evidence on record before making such order
of remand, Since there is no necessity for taking
any further evidence in the interest of resolution of
the dispute on title, the order of remand passed by
the High Court Division cannot be sustained. ...(14)

Probodh Ranjan Shome vs Md Easin, 4 BSCR (AD)
457 and Sukumar Sen vs Gouranga Dey, 42 DLR (AD) 18
ref.

AJ Mohammad Ali, Senior Advocate, instructed by
Md Aftab Hossain,
Appellants.

Advocate-on-Record—For the

Khondakar Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior Advocate,
instructed by SR Khoshnabish, Advocate-on-Record—For
the Respondent Nos. 1-2, 4, 13, 15-16, 18, 22 and 24.

Not Represented—For the Respondent Nos. 3,5-12,
14, 17, 19-21, 23, 25 and 26.

Judgment
Md Joynul Abedin J: This appeal by leave by he
plaintiffs is directed against the judgment and order
dated }8-2-2002 passed by the High Court Division

in Civil Revision No. 1788 of 1997 making the rule
ecient ANSE ce
*Civil Appeal No. 136 of 2003.

(From the judgment and order dated 18-2-2002

Passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No.
1788 of 1997)

absolute upon setting aside the judgment and decree
dated 19-11-1996 passed in Title Appeal No. 13 of
1995 by the learned District Judge, Chandpur,
affirming those dated 30-11-1994 ed in Partition
Suit No. 113 of 1994 by the learned Subordinate
Judge, 2nd Court, Chandpur, decreeing the same.

2. The appellant Nos. 1-3 and respondent No.
56 as plaintiffs instituted the aforesaid Partition Suit
No. 113 of 1994 for partition alleging that the suit
land measuring 0.36 acres of CS Khatian No. 341,
SA Khatian No. 347 of Mouza 418 Kherighar for-
merly within PS Hajiganj now Shaharasti originally
belonged to Torab Ali. Torab Ali had two wives. By
his first wife he had six sons and a daughter and by
his second wife he had two daughters, Khairunnessa
defendant No. | and Jibonnessa defendant No. 2.
Defendant No. 1 Khairunnessa was married to
Mohammad Mia and both of them resided and lived
with Torab Ali in his house. Torab Ali, during his
lifetime, sold 0.36 acres of land, out of suit plot No.
1661 with a "Chouchala" tin hut thereon to defen-
dant No. | Khairunnessa and Mohammad Mia by
registered Kabala dated 19-10-1955 and delivered
possession to them. During SA operation this 0.36
acres of land of suit plot No. 1661 was recorded in
the name of Mohammad Mia and his wife defendant
No. 1 Khairunnessa and they paid rents for the said
land. Mohammad Mia while in possession thereof
died leaving behind his widow defendant No. |
Khairunnessa and the plaintiff Nos. 1-4 as his sons
and daughters. Defendant No. | Khairunnessa
inherited 0.02 acre of land out of 0.18 acre of land
left by her husband Mohammad Mia and the plain-
tiffs 1-4 inherited the remaining 0.15'/, acres of land
left by Mohammad Mia. The plaintiffs are in pos-
session of their share in the suit property. Since
metes and bounds among the co-sharers the suit
property has not been partitioned by the plaintitYs
requested the co-sharer defendants to partition the
suit property but they refused. Hence the plaintiffs
filed the aforesaid suit for partition.

3. Defendant No. 1, mother of the plaintills,
filed an application praying for her saham to the
extent of 0.96 acres excluding 0.36 acres as purchased

            
by her and her husband Mohammad Mia out
of 6.56 acres of the Suit Khatian,

4. The defendant-respondent Nos. 2, 3, 5-20,
22-53, 55, 57 and S8 contested the suit by filing joint
written statement denying the material allegations
made in the plaint contending, inrer alia, that the
suit for partition is not maintainable and it is bad for
defect of parties and for not bringing the joint prop-
erty into hotchpotch of the suit. Their case is that
Torab Ali, the original owner of the suit land, had
some other lands besides the suit land. Torab Ali
married two wives and had 6 sons one daughter by
his first wife and two daughters by his second wife.
Torab Ali gifted some lands to his grand sons and
transferred the remaining land of the suit Khatian to
his 5 sons Ali Ahmed, Mohammad Mia, Abdul
Halim, Abdul Gani and Abdul Kader by different
registered Kabuliats and patta dated 2-8-1951, 27-5-
1951, 29-7-1951 and 15-9-1953 and thus exhausted
his interest in the suit Khatian. Exhibit-1 the kabala
deed dated 19-10-1955, was executed by false per-
sonification when Torab Ali was not alive. Since
Torab Ali had no interest left in the suit Khatian
Mohammad Mia and Khairunnessa acquired no title
and possession in the aforesaid 0.36 acres of land by
virtue of the said kabala deed dated 19-10-1955.
Subsequent to the said Kabala deed there arose
some dispute among the heirs of Torab Ali as
regards possession of the properties left by Torab
Ali. Hence Hazera Banu, second wife of Torab Ali,
filed a Criminal Case No. 1323 of 1955 in the Court
of the Magistrate, 2nd Class and during pendency of
the criminal case lands left by Torab Ali were parti-
tioned among his wife, sons and daughters amicably
and a partition deed was executed and registered on
24-3-1956. Mohammad Mia and defendant No. |
Khairunnessa never produced the same before or at
the time of execution of the partition deed Exhibit
"Ga". Since a complicated question of title is
involved the instant simple suit for partition is not
maintainable without ay prayer for declaration of
title.

5. The trial Court decreed the suit in prelimi-
nary form by judgment and order dated 30-11-1994

giving saham of 15%, acres of land to the plaintiffs
and a saham of 95'/, acres of land to the defendant
No. 1.

6. Against the said decree the defendant-pet-
tioners preferred Title Appeal No. 13 of 1995 in the
Court of District Judge Chandpur, who by its judy.
ment and decree dated 19-11-1996 dismissed the
appeal on contest with the concurrent finding thay
Mohammad Mia is not a party to the Partition deed
Exhibit 'Ga', and defendant No. 1, Khairunnessa
having refused registration of the partition Exhibit
‘Ga’ the same is not binding upon the plaintiffs. The
learned District Judge further found that the kabala
deed dated 19-10-1955, Exhibit 1, being executed
and registered earlier Mohammad Mia and defen-
dant No. 1 Khairunnessa became the co-sharer in the
suit jote but Mohammad Mia being a co-sharer has
not been made a party to the partition deed dated 24-
3-1956 intentionally and, as such, the partition deed
is not binding upon the plaintiffs.

7. The defendants being aggrieved by the afore-
said judgment and decree preferred Civil Revision
No. 1788 of 1997 before the High Court Division
whereupon a Division Bench by the impugned judg-
ment and order dated 18-2-2002 set aside the said
judgment and decree of the appellate Court below
and sent the case back on remand to the trial Court
for fresh trial of the suit as a suit for declaration of
title and partition by allowing the plaintiffs to amend
the plaint accordingly giving a chance to the defen-
dants to file additional written statement if they so
require.

8. The learned Judges of the High Court
Division remanded the suit for a fresh trial purport-
edly on the ground that the suit involves complical-
ed question of title as the Kabala deed dated 19-10-
1995 was disputed by the defendants and in view of
the findings of the appellate Court below as regards
the registered Kabuliats and patta vitiated for non-
consideration of the solenama, Exhibit-Gha, filed in
the Criminal Case No. 1323 of 1995.

9. Leave was granted to consider whether
remand of the suit for fresh trial as a suit for declaration

            
of title and partition for the reasons stated
above is sustainable in law when there is concurrent
finding of fact by the trial Court as well as the appel-
Jate Court below on the basis of materials on record
that the Kabala deed dated 19-10-1955 in favour of
the plaintifls was proved to be genuine but the reg-
jstered Kabuliats and patta were not acted upon and
the father of the plaintiffs Mohammad Mia was not
a party to the partition deed, Exhibit-Ga and the
defendant No. 1, mother of the plaintiffs, refused
registration of the partition deed.

10. We have heard Mr AJ Mohammad Ali, the
jearned Counsel for the appellants and Mr
Khandaker Mahbubuddin Ahmed, the learned
Counsel for respondent Nos. 1-2, 4, 13, 15-16, 18,
22 and 24 and perused the judgment of the High
Court Division and other connected papers. Mr
Mohammad Ali contends that since the trial Court as
well as the appellate Court below have decided all
the issues involved in the case on the basis of evi-
dence on record the impugned judgment for remand
by the High Court Division is uncalled for and, as
such, not tenable in law. Mr Ahmed on the other
hand while supporting the impugned order of
remand submits that since complicated question of
title is involved the High Court Division acted in
accordance with law in remanding the case for being
tried also as a suit for declaration of title after
required amendment of the plant.

M1. Careful examination of the materials on
record shows that both the trial Court as well as the
appellate Court below has concurrently found on
proper and adequate consideration and discussion of
evidence and materials on record that the Kabala
deed dated 19-10-1955, Exhibit-1, which confers
title on the plaintiffs in respect of the suit land has
been proved to be genuine and valid. Both the trial
as well as the appellate Court below concurrently
found on due consideration of the evidence and
materials on record that the registered Kabuliats and
patta, Exhibit Ka series and Kha, were not acted
upon. Further the Courts below also concurrently
found that the said partition deed dated 24-3-1956,
Exhibit-Ga, did not make any mention about the
aid partition aforesaid Kabuliats and patta and the
deed having not been executed and registered by the
father of the plaintiffs Mohammad Mia and mother
of the plaintiffs Khairunnessa, defendant No. 1, the
same was not binding on the plaintiffs and in this
view of the matter non-consideration of the solena-
ma by the appellate Court below did not vitiate the
finding of the trial Court as well as the appellate
Court below that the Kabuliats and patta were not
acted upon and the said Kabala deed dated 19-10-
1955 was genuine and it transferred title to
Mohammad Mia and Khairunnessa, father and
mother respectively of the plaintiffs.

12. Besides, since the said solenama, on the
basis of which the said criminal case was compro-
mised between the parties, was prepared on the basis
of the said partition deed dated 24-3-1956 to which
the predecessors of the plaintiffs, Mohammad Mia
and Khairunnessa, were not parties, non-considera-
tion of the solenama by the Court below did not viti-
ate their concurrent finding that Mohammad Mia
and defendant No. 1 Khairunnessa acquired title to
the suit land and had possession thereof by virtue of
the said kabala deed dated 19-10-1955. It is there-
fore palpably clear that despite sufficient evidence
being available on record in support of the concur-
rent finding of the trial'as well as appellate Court
below as regards title and possession of the plaintiffs
the impugned judgment of the High Court Division
for remand of the suit for determination of title and
Partition cannot be sustained in law. The order of
remand betrays lack of judicial acumen of the
learned Judge to make a proper judgment on appre-
ciation of the evidence on record. When the dispute
could effectively be resolved on the basis of evi-
dence on record the High Court Division would not
be permitted in law to send the case back on remand
for fresh hearing.

13. Suit can be remanded by the appellate Court
with direction for giving findings and decision on
certain issues where the trial Court omitted to do so.
In terms of section 107 of the Code of Civil
Procedure the appellate Court has the power of
remand of a case under the circumstances mentioned

            
in Order XLI, rules 23 and 25. The appellate
Court can also exercise the power of remand in exer-
cise of its inherent power. The power of remand by
the appellate Court is not limited to specific case
mentioned in rule 23, The Court may also order a
remand in cases other than those covered under rule
23 and may do so also under section 151 of the Code
if it becomes necessary for the ends of justice. Even
the High Court Division can make an order of
remand while exercising revisional Jurisdiction if it
is so required for full and effective adjudication of
all the relevant points involved in a case. No
remand order can however be made to facilitate a
party to fill up the lacuna in his case.

14. It is now well settled that the remand orders
are not to be made as a matter of Course. The High
Court Division as a revisional Court is required to
properly appreciate the relevance of the evidence on
record before making such order of remand. The
case of Probodh Ranjan Shome ys Md Easin, 4
BSCR (AD) 457 may be referred to in this connec-
tion. Since there is no necessity for taking any fur-
ther evidence in the interest of resolution of the dis-
pute on title, the order of remand passed by the High
Court Division cannot be sustained. The case of
Sukumar Sen vs Gouranga Dey, 42 DLR (AD) 18
can be profitably cited on the point.

15. In view of the evidence and materials on
record the concurrent findings of fact as regards title
and possession arrived at by both the trial Court as
well as the appellate Court below are sound and sus-
tainable both in fact and law. The view taken by the
learned Judges of the High Court Division in send-
ing the case on remand is therefore erratic and per-
verse and the impugned judgment is accordingly set
aside and the judgment and decree passed by the
trial Court as well as the appellate Court below are
hereby restored.

The appeal is accordingly allowed without any
order as to costs.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION

(Civil)
Md Tafazzul Islam J | Abdul Gafur and others...
Md Abdul AzizJ |v... TR te «Petitioners
SK Sinha J vs
Judgment Md Abdur Razzak ang
August 19th, 2009 | others......... Respondents*

Code of Civil Procedure (v of 1908)
Section 115

Courts below also concurrently found that
the defendants have failed to prove their right,
title, interest and possession in the suit lands by
adducing oral and documentary evidence. These
findings of fact are not immune from interfer-
ence by the High Court Division in exercise of
revisional jurisdiction in the absence of misread-
ing or non-consideration of the evidence on
record. The learned Judge of the High Court
Division has exceeded its jurisdiction in interfer-
ing with the concurrent findings of fact, which is

liable to be interfered with. sese( 12)

Ali vs Jainul Abedin Mia 35 DLR (AD) 216 and
Bangladesh vs AKM Abdul Hye 9 MLR (AD) 82 = 56
DLR (AD) 53 ref.

Md Abdul Jabbar, Advocate instructed by Md Nawah
Ali, Advocate-on-Record—For the Petitioners.

Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan, Senior Advocate instructed
by Chowdhury Md Zahangir, Advocate-on-Record—For
respondents.

Judgment

SK Sinha J : This appeal at the instance of the
defendant Nos. 24-36 and 38 is by leave granted by
this Court against the judgment and order dated 2st
June, 2005 of a Single Bench of the High Court

*Civil Appeal No. 122 of 2006.

(From the judgment and order dated 21st June, 2006
passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No.
3001 of 2001).

            
Division in Civil Revision No. 3001 of 2001 making
the Rule absolute and reversing those dated 12th
April, 2001 of the Additional District Judge, 1st
Court, Jhenaidah in Title Appeal No. 79 of 1996
affirming those dated 27th April, 1996 of the Senior
Assistant Judge, Kaligonj, Jhenaidah in Title Suit
No. 14 of 1996 decreeing the suit and allotting
saham of 1,94 acres of land out of the suit lands to
the plaintiffs and half portion of lands of CS khatian
No. 77 to the defendant Nos. 24-36 and 38.

2. The respondent Nos. 15-32 instituted the suit
for partition on the averments that the suit lands
appertain to CS khatian Nos. 18, 77, 133 and 138
belonged to Hossain Biswas, Ebad Ali Mondal,
Sobhan Mondal, Khorshed Mondal, Jamat Ali
Mondal and Hamid Mondal who were predecessor-
in-interest of the plaintiffs-respondents and defend-
ents-appellants. The plaintiffs are in ejmali posses-
sion of the suit lands with the defendants during the
settlement operation. The plaintiffs entrusted Omed
Ali and Karam Ali to get the suit lands recorded in
their names jointly with the defendants but they, in
utter violation of such direction got the suit lands
recorded in the names of the defendants. Despite
such wrong recording the plaintiffs have been
enjoying the suit lands in ejmali with the defendants
without any interference but some times before the
date of institution of the suit, the defendants have
tried to establish their title in the entire suit lands
denying the plaintiffs title.

3. Defendant Nos. 1-8 and 12 contested the suit
by filing a joint written statement. Their case is that
they exclusively owned and acquired title by
adverse possession of the suit lands. A portion of the
suit land appertaining to CS khatian No. 77 was pur-
chased in auction by the land lord in Rent Execution
Case No. 2100 of 1997, who thereupon settled the
said lands with Omed Ali and Samed Ali, the prede-
cessors-in-interest defendants No. 1-8 and 12 and
since then they had possessed the same and after
their death the defendants have been enjoying the
said lands by paying rent. The defendants No, 24-36
and 38 who were the heirs of Mobarak Mondal and
Ebad Mondal also filed a joint written statement
praying for separate saham by way of inheritance
denying the claim of the defendant Nos. 1-8 and 12.
‘Their case is that they are owners of the lands in CS
khatian No, 77 by way of settlement from the land-
lord and have possessed the same.

4. The trial Court on consideration of the evi-
dence on record found the plaintiffs title and posses-
sion in respect of 1.94 acres of land and allotted
them saham of the said portion of lands. The trial
Court also allotted saham of 8 annas share in the
lands in CS khatian No. 77 to the defendant Nos. 24-
36 and 38 on the findings inter alia that they were
the owners of the lands on the basis of adverse pos-
session and certificate sale. The defendant Nos. 1-8
and 12 being aggrieved by the said judgment and
order preferred Title Appeal No. 79 of 1996; the
leamed Additional District Judge, Ist Court,
Jhenaidah who heard the said appeal by judgment
and order dated 12th April, 2001 maintained the
judgment and decree of the trial Court. The said
defendents thereupon moved the High Court
Division in Civil Revision No. 3001 of 2000. A
Single Bench of the High Court Division upon hear-
ing the parties by judgment and order dated 21st
June, 2005 made the rule absolute and set aside
those of the Courts below. The learned Single Judge
observed that both the Courts below committed
error of law in failing to consider the material evi-
dence led by the defendants with regard to the cer-
tificate sale and the rent receipts Exhibit A series and
the sale certificate, Exhibit B and that the plaintiffs
failed to prove their title but the Courts below with-
out considering those exhibits disbelieved the
defendant's case.

5. It is urged on behalf of the appellants that the
learned Judge of the High Court Division erred in
law in interfering with the concurrent findings of the
Courts below in failing to consider that the Court
below on a proper appreciation of the evidence on
record have arrived at the finding that the defendant
Nos. 1-8 and 12 have failed to prove their claim of
auction purchase by adducing documentary evi-
dence and also without reversing those findings of
facts. It was further urged that the learned Judge of


            
the High Court Division fell in an error in failing to
consider that Exhibit A series, the rent receipts do
not relate to the lands in CS khatian No. 77 and
Exhibit B the sale certificate has not been proved
and that the said Exhibit B has not acted upon in the
absence of delivery of possession.

6. We have perused the judgment of the Courts
below and heard the learned counsels at length, The
trial Court observed that the defendants initially did
not mention about the auction sale of the suit lands
for arrears of rent in their original written statement
but subsequently by way of amendment on 13th
August, 1995 introduced those facts. It was further
observed that the defendants also filed an applica-
tion on 9th March, 1993 stating that the sale certifi-
cate was lost and as the volume book was torn up,
they failed to procure the certified copy of the same.
The trial Court noticed that the defendants subse-
quently filed Exhibit B, the certified copy of the sale
certificate said have been obtained on 17th May,
1994, but in the said sale certificate nothing was
mentioned that the original volume book was torn.
In the premises, the defendants ought to have proved
Exhibit B by calling for the original volume book
but they failed to prove the same. Fazlur Rahman
(DW 1) in course of his cross-examination stated
that he had no personal knowledge about the auction
purchase and that he made inconsistent statement
about the auction sale. The defendants did not
adduce any evidence in support of delivery of pos-
session. The trial Court held that Mokai Mondal
(DW 7) made inconsistent statements regarding pos-
session, inasmuch as, he stated that the auction sale
was held about 33 years ago but on the other breath,
he stated that it was held about 58 years ago. The
trial Court further observed that the Exhibit A series
did not relate to the lands in CS khatian No. 77 and
over and above, those rent receipts were not sup-
posed to be kept in the possession of the defendents,
which are ante dated documents, that the defendants
have miserably failed that the lands in CS khatian
have been sold for arrears of rent and that the land
lord has purchased the same and thereafter, the land
lord has settled the same to the sons of Ali Hossain.

7. The Court of appeal below reassessed the
evidence on record and held that the defendants
failed to produce any documentary evidence in Sup-
port of the auction sale, that the defendants also
failed to prove that the auction purchasers got deliy-
ery of possession in pursuance of Rent Execution
Case No. 2100 of 1937, that the defendants also
failed to prove the settlement of the lands from the
land lord by calling the counter fail from the land
lord's sherista, that the auction sale was collusive
and on the basis of which, the defendants did not
acquire any title and that the plaintiffs have acquired
title on the basis of taking settlement from the auc-
tion purchasers.

8. These findings of the Courts below are based
upon proper appreciation of the evidence on record,
The learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division did not reverse those findings and abruptly
made the Rule absolute on the reasoning that both
the Courts below had committed error of law in not
considering and appreciating the material evidence
led by the defendants. The learned Single Judge did
not point out what material evidence were not con-
sidered by the Court of appeal below, other than
Exhibits A series and B. In respect of these Exhibits,
the Courts below discarded them as collusive docu-
ments created by the defendants for the purpose of
the suit and this finding of fact is binding on the
learned Judge of the High Court Division but the
learned Judge believed them as genuine documents
without discarding the findings of the Court below
and also without assigning any reason whatsoever.

9. It was urged on behalf of the respondents that
the learned Judge of the High Court Division is per-
fectly justified in interfering with the judgments of
Courts below, inasmuch as, the Courts below had
illegally disbelieved the title of the defendant Nos.
1-8 and 12, in failing to consider that the SA khatian
has been prepared in their names and they have also
filed rent receipts which can be used or collateral
evidence of possession. In support of his contention
the learned counsel has referred the cases of Exfiu!
Ali vs Jainul Abedin Mia 35 DLR (AD) 216 and

            
Government of Bangladesh vs AKM Abdul Hye 9
MLR (AD) 82 = 56 DLR (AD) 53

10, In the case of Erfan Ali (Supra) this Court
observed “this view is erroneous, for rent receipts,
though not documents of title, are important item of
evidence of possession and may be used as collater-
al evidence of title since possession generally fol-
Jows title" We do not dispute the statement of law
made on interpretation of rent receipts but the facts
of his case are quire distinguishable from the facts
of that case. In that case the plaintiff claimed that
Kali Charan purchased suit plot Nos. 25 and 27, got
his name mutated in the land lords sherista and paid
rent accordingly, and thereafter, he purchased from
the attomey and after purchase, he constructed huts
and inducted the defendant No, | as monthly tenant,
In support of his claim he filed some rent receipts.
The learned District Judge excluded these rent
receipts from consideration taking the view that they
did not relate to the suit plots. The High Court
Division disagreed with the views and observed that
unless the tenants name was recorded in the rent roll
by mutation, he could not pay rent, that though plot
numbers were not mentioned in the receipts other
particulars including exact amount of rent were
specifically mentioned there and that this fact estab-
lished connection between them and the lot in ques-
tion. The High Court Division further observed that
no rent was paid by Shashi Bhushan or his wife, the
owner of plot No. 25 at any time before the State
Acquisition came into force, that thereafter the rent
for the said lands were paid by one Pati Ram, the
defendant No. 2 son of Kalicharan and since the
plaintiffs purchased in 1951, he has been paying
rent, the rent receipts were excluded from consider-
ation by the lower appellate Court taking the view
that these are provisional receipts and that they carry
litle weight. The Appellate Division discarded this
view as erroneous. In this case the trial Court clear-
ly found that DW 1 failed to prove the rent receipts
Exhibit A series on the reasoning that he had no
knowledge about the payment of rent and that these
receipts were ante dated created for the purpose of
the suit. This finding was affirmed by the Court of
appeal below but the High Court Division did not
consider those findings.

11. In the case of AKM Abdul Hye, (Supra) the
High Court Division was of the view that the pre-
sumption of correctness as to the entry of SA and RS
record finally published under section 19(3) in
Chapter IV has no basis. The Appellate Div
found those observations were not correct and
observed that :

"presumption so attached under section
144A of the Act to the khatian prepared under
section 144 of the Act is rebuttable and the
respondents No. 1 and 2 has (sic) rebutted the
correctness of the entry made therein as regard
the name of Durga Charan Mondal’s son and
name of Gonesh Chandra Mondal son of Joy
Gopal Mondal and, as such, the finding of the
High Court Division that the presumption of
correctness as regard the entries in the RS kha-
tian is not available, is not correct."

This case is also distinguishable and has no manner
of application in the facts of the given case. There
is no presumptive value in SA khatian, and the
defendants cannot base their title on the basis of
recording of the lands in their names in SA khatian.

12. The Courts below concurrently found that
the plaintiffs have acquired title and possession in
respect of 1.94 acres of land and the defendant Nos.
24-36 and 38 are entitled to 8 annas saham in CS
khatian No. 77 are based upon proper appreciation
of the evidence on record. The Courts below also
concurrently found that the defendants have failed
to prove their right, title, interest and possession in
the suit lands by adducing oral and documentary
evidence. These findings of fact are not immune
from interference by the High Court Div
exercise of revisional jurisdiction in the absence
misreading or non-consideration of the evide
record. The High Court Division without an
ing that the Courts below have found plainti
and possession on a misreading or non-cons
tion of the evidence on record has illegally
interfered

            
with the concurrent findings of fact,
Therefore, we find that the leamed Judge of the
High Court Division has exceeded its jurisdiction in
interfering with the concurrent findings of fact,
which is liable to be interfered with,

The appeal is allowed without any order as to
costs. The judgment of the High Court Division is
set aside and restored those of the Courts below.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
Md Ruhul Amin CJ | Government of Bangladesh.
Md Fazlul Karim J | .....................................Appellant
MM Ruhul Amin J
Md Tafazzul Islam J
Md Joynul Abedin J vs
Md Hassan Ameen J
Md Abdul Matin J
Judgment
April 17th, 2008

Sabera Aman and others.....
sdecnsitenecesetle Respondents*

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 27(1)
Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 109
Emergency Power Rules, 2007
Rule 11(3)
Code of Criminal Procedure (Vv of 1898)
Section 426

Bail in a pending appeal—The matter of
granting bail by the High Court Division, during
the period of emergency, in a pending appeal
filed by the convict who has been convicted and
sentenced under the provision of Anti-Corrup-
tion Commission Act, 2004 in case of short sen-

*Civil Appeal No. 36 of 2008 with Criminal Petition No,
146 of 2008.

(From the Order dated 9th December, 2007 passed by
the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 9600 of 2007).

fence not exceeding 3 years, when the Appeal
could not be disposed of within 90 working days
for no fault of the appellant and/or in the case of
serious illness endangering life to be certified by

duly constituted Med

al Board, may consider
the matter of granting bail in an appropriate case

feanappeal, oc ag (24)

Hasan Foez Siddique, Additional Attorney-General
instructed by ASM Khalequzzaman, Advocate-on-
Record—For the Appellant.

Rafique-ul-Hugq, Senior Counsel, instructed by Nf
Aftab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent
No. 1.

Not represented—For the Respondent Nos. 2-4.

Judgment

Md Ruhul Amin CJ: This Appeal and the
Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal were heard
together since the respondent No. 1 in Civil Appeal
No. 36 of 2008 and the petitioner in Criminal
Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 146 of 2008 are
common and the matter in issue in the Appeal and
the Criminal Petition is also common i.e. granting of
the bail in the writ petition and rejection of the
prayer for bail in a pending Criminal Appeal No.
3990 of 2007 filed against the judgment and order
dated June 21, 2007 of the Court of Special Judge
No. 1, Dhaka in Special Case No. 1 of 2007 (arising
out of Kafrul PS Case No. 15 dated March 6, 2007
corresponding to ACC GR No. 12 of 2007).

2, The facts of the case of the Civil Appeal
and the Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal need
not be stated in detail since the same is not so much
so necessary for the disposal of the Appeal and the
Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal (the petition).
It is material to state that the respondent No, 1 in the
Appeal, who is the petitioner, was put on trial along
with another who is her husband.

3. The respondent No. | in the Appeal and the
petitioner in the Petition was put on trial to answer

            
the charge under section 26(2) of the Anti-
Corruption Commission Act, 2004 and Rule 15
Gha(5) of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007 read
with section 109 of the Penal Code and also the
charge framed under section 27(1) of the Anti-
Corruption Commission Act, 2004 read with section
109 of the Penal Code.

4. On conclusion of the trial the Special tribu-
nal found guilty the respondent No. 1 in the Appeal,
who is also the petitioner in the Petition, under sec-
tion 27(1) of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act,
2004 read with section 109 of the Penal Code and
has been convicted thereunder and sentenced her to
suffer simple imprisonment for 3(three) years

5. It may be mentioned the respondent No. 1
in the Appeal, who is also the petitioner in the
Petition, was not found guilty of the charge under
section 26(2) of the Anti-Corruption Commission
Act, 2004 and Rule 15 Gha(5) of the Emergency
Power Rules, 2007 read with section 109 of the
Penal Code and thereupon was acquitted of the said
charge.

6. As against the judgment and order of the
Court of Special Judge the respondent No. 1 in the
Appeal, who is also the petitioner in the Petition,
filed Criminal Appeal No. 3990 of 2007 before the
High Court Division. The appeal so filed came up
for admission hearing and the High Court Division
admitted the appeal for final hearing by the order
dated October 1, 2007 and also stayed realisation of
fine tll disposal of the appeal. On that day an appli-
cation with a prayer for bail was filed before the
High Court Division and the said Division upon
referring to the provision of Rule 11(3) of the
Emergency Power Rules, 2007 rejected the prayer
for bail and that also rejected the prayer for staying
the judgment of the Special Court confiscating the
property of the respondent No. |.

7. It appears that the respondent No. | having
had not been released i.e. not being enlarged on bail
during the pendency of the criminal appeal filed by
her against the judgment and order of the Court of
Special Judge, her tadbirker moved the High Court
division in writ jurisdiction seeking reliefs, includ-
ing bail till final disposal of the Criminal Appeal No.
3990 of 2007.

8. The writ petition, being Writ Petition No.
9600 of 2007, was filed with the prayer "Issue a
Rule Nisi calling upon the Respondents to show
cause as to why the Rule 11(3) of the Emergency
Rules and section 28Ka of the Anti-Corruption
Commission Act, 2004 should not be declared
inconsistent with the Article 7(2) and 35 of the con-
stitution and as to why the petitioner Sabera Aman
should not be enlarged on bail in Kafrul Police
Station Case No. 15(3) of 2007 dated 6-3-2007
which has been registered as Special Case No. | of
2007 and convicted under sections 27(1) of the Anti-
Corruption Commission Act, 2004 read with section
109 of the Penal Code and sentenced to suffer sim-
ple imprisonment for 3(three) years in Special Case
No. 1 of 2007" and also prayed for enlarging the
writ petitioner i.e. the petitioner in the Criminal
Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 146 of 2008 on ad-
interim bail.

9. The High Court Division by the order
dated December 9, 2007 issued Rule in the writ peti-
tion so filed and granted ad-interim bail to the writ
petitioner "pending disposal of the Rule or until fur-
ther order, as the case may be......... a

10. As against the ad-interim order of the High
Court Division the respondent No. | in the writ peti-
tion ic. Bangladesh, represented by the Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs filed Civil Petition for
Leave to Appeal, being No. 49 of 2008. The said
Petition for Leave to Appeal came up for hearing
before the Court on January 13, 2008 and upon hear-
ing the learned Additional Attorney-General as well
as the learned Counsel entering Caveat for respon-
dent No. | i.e. writ petitioner this Court granted
leave to appeal to consider the submissions of the
learned Additional Attorney-General that the writ
petitioner convicted under section 27(1) of the Anti-
Corruption Commission Act, 2004 read with section
109 of the Penal Code and was sentenced to simple
imprisonment for 3(three) years in Special Case No.

            
1 of 2007 and as against the said judgment and order
in the special case the writ petitioner having had
filed appeal, being Criminal Appeal No, 3990 of
2007, before the High Court Division and in the said
appeal an application for bail was filed and the same
ed, that the appeal is pending and there is
a specific procedure for filing appeal and disposing
the same and, as such, the impugned order of the
High Court Division passed in the writ petition is
bad in law and the same is liable to be set aside. It
was also submitted by the learned Additional
Attorney-General that the writ petitioner having had
filed criminal appeal and having had sought particu-
lar remedy, her filing of the writ petition for getting
self-same remedy instead of moving higher Court,
the writ petition was not maintainable and, as such,
the order sought to be appealed is bad in law and the
same is liable to be set aside. This Court granted
leave to consider the aforesaid submissions of the
learned Additional Attorney-General.

11. The respondent No. | in the petition for
leave to appeal filed an application with the prayer
for not to stay the order of the High Court Division
granting ad-interim bail.

12. As it appears from the application filed by
the respondent No. 1 in the Civil Petition for Leave
to Appeal that while the said Petition for Leave to
Appeal was pending for hearing the respondent No.
1 was released on bail upon accepting her bail bond.

13. At the time of hearing of the Civil Petition
for Leave to Appeal No. 49 of 2008 the learned
Counsel for the respondent No. | having had real-
ized the irregularity in the matter of filing the writ
petition after being having not the relief of bail and
obtaining ad-interim bail in respect of the respon-
dent No, 1 submitted that the writ petitioner i.e.
respondent No. | in the Civil Petition for Leave to
Appeal would file appeal with the prayer for condo-
nation of delay as against the order of the High
Court Division dated October 1, 2008 passed in
Criminal Appeal No. 3990 of 2007 refusing the
prayer for bail and that as the respondent No. | has
already been released in the light of the order passed
by the High Court Division in the writ petition and

that as she is seriously ill being a cancer patient the
order of the High Court Division granting bail may
not be stayed and that she may be allowed to enjoy
the privilege of bail upon being already released in
the light of the order of the High Court Division,

14. The Appeal came up for hearing along with
the Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal on 17-4.
2008. The Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal
has been filed against the order of the High Court
Division dated October 1, 2007 rejecting the prayer
for bail in Criminal Appeal No. 39990 of 2007.

15. When the appeal was taken up for hearing
the learned Counsel for the petitioner in Criminal
Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 146 of 2008 sub-
mitted that the writ petitioner filed an application
before the High Court Division in Writ Petition No.
9600 of 2007 for discharging the Rule obtained
therein for non-prosecution and the High Court
Division upon allowing the application has dis-
charged the Rule obtained in the aforementioned
writ petition for non-prosecution and that re-called
and vacated the ad-interim order passed by the High
Court Division in the writ petition.

16. In that state of the matter, we called upon
the learned Additional Attorney-General as to
whether any useful purpose would be served in pro-
ceeding with hearing of the appeal and thereupon
the learned Additional Attorney-General submitted
since the Rule obtained in the Writ Petition No.
9600 of 2007 has already been discharged for non-
prosecution and the ad-interim order passed therein
has also been recalled and vacated the appeal filed
as against the order dated December 9,2007 passed
in Writ Petition No. 9600 of 2007 has lost its effica-
cy and that no useful purpose would be served in
proceeding with the appeal.

17. In the background of the aforesaid submis-
sion of the learned Additional Attorney-General
there was no necessity of proceeding with the appeal
and accordingly the same is dismissed.

18. It was noticed that the writ petition was
filed having had not the desired result i.e, bail, in the

            
criminal appeal which was filed against the judg
ment and order of the Special Court convicting and
the respondent No. 1 in the appeal for
rs simple imprisonment. The resort so
made was in no way appreciable one from any angle
of the practice and procedure of this Court i.e.
supreme Court of Bangladesh.

19. As we have earlier said that the respondent
No. 1 in the appeal, i.e. the petitioner in the writ
petition having had not the desired result i.e. bail till
final hearing of the criminal appeal the tadbirker of
the respondent No. 1 resorted to the course, i.e.
moving the High Court Division in writ jurisdiction,
as it appears, primarily for enlargement of the writ
petitioner on bail, although the course resorted to
was in no Way appreciable rather the writ petition so
filed was a queer resort or in other words to have the
desired result through a resort which is totally dif=
ferent from the practice and the course prescribed by
the procedure of the Court. The resort so made is in
no way appreciable rather the course so pursued is
seriously depreciable. In the totality of the facts and
circumstances of the matter, i.e. filing of writ peti-
tion primarily to get the writ petitioner enlarged on
bail, it is quite evident that action of the tadbirker of
the writ petitioner was indiscreet one and such resort
is highly depreciable. Any one resorting to queer
practice in a Court of law and that resort so made as
have no sanction of practice and procedure of the
Coun is liable to be brought within the net of law
and to be dealt with in accordance with law, Had the
writ petitioner been not seriously ill being a cancer
patient, the result obtained upon resorting to the pro-
cedure in question would not have allowed enjoy.
We are of the opinion that for the indiscreet act of
the tadbirker the writ petitioner should not suffer.

20. Since the appeal in the background of the
facts and circumstances of the case has become
infructuous or in other words no useful purpose
would be served in proceeding with the appeal the
same is dismissed with the aforesaid observation.
‘There is no order as to costs.

21. The Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal
No. 146 of 2008 has been filed as the order
of the High Court Division dated October 1, 2007
passed by Criminal Appeal No. 3990 of 2007 rejeet-
ing the prayer for bail of the petitioner. It appears the
same is barred by 190 days. An application s
condonation of delay has been filed. W
perused the said application for condonation of
delay and have heard the learned Counsels of the
parties. On perusal of the statements made in the
petition secking condonation of delay, it is seen that
the period of delay in filing the Criminal Petition for
Leave to Appeal has sufficiently been explained and
the explanation so offered merits consideration. In
that view of the matter delay in filing the Criminal
Petition for Leave to Appeal is condoned.

22. We have heard the learned Counsel appear-
ing for the petitioner in the Criminal Petition for
Leave to Appeal and also have heard the learned
Additional Attorney-General.

23. As it has already been mentioned hereinbe-
fore that the petitioner is seriously ill being a cancer
patient and that she has been sentenced to:sutiers 3
(three) years simple imprisonment on June 21, 2007
and as against that she has filed an appeal i.e.
Criminal Appeal No. 3990 of 2007. It may also be
mentioned that while granting leave as against the
ad-interim order dated 9-12-2007 of the High Court
Division in Writ Petition No. 9600 of 2007 granting
bail to the petitioner in the Criminal Petition for
Leave to Appeal i.e. Respondent No. | in the Civil
Appeal No. 36 of 2008 this Court did not stay the
order of the High Court Division granting ad-inter-
im bail to the petitioner since prior to that date she
was released on bail upon execution of bail bond
and that also seriously ill being a cancer patient.

24. The matter of granting bail by the |
Court Division, during the period of emergency, in a
pending appeal filed by the convict who has been
convicted and sentenced by the Special Court under
the provision of Anti-Corruption Act, 1957 or that as
per the provision of Anti-Corruption Commission
Act, 2004 as well as under the provision of Penal
Code in the background of the provision of Rule
11(3) of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007 came up
for consideration in Criminal appeal Nos. 5 and 6 of


            
2008 and therein this Court has observed "the appel-
late Court, in case of short sentence not exceeding 3
years, when the appeal could not be disposed of
within 90 working days for no fault of the appe
and/or in the case of serious illness endangering life
to be certified by duly constituted Medical Board,
may consider the matter of granting bail in an appro-
priate case in an appeal".

25. In view of the aforesaid observation in
Criminal Appeal Nos. 5 and 6 of 2008 and the fact
the petitioner in the Criminal Petition for Leave to
Appeal No. 146 of 2008 being seriously ill and as
the statements made in the application not to stay
the order of the High Court Division granting bail as
well as the submissions made by the learned
Counsel of the petitioner in the Criminal Petition for
Leave to Appeal that the petitioner is a cancer
patient being not disputed from the side of the State
and that the period of sentence being 3(three) years
simple imprisonment we are of the view, that the
petitioner's prayer to allow her to enjoy the privilege
of bail granted by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No. 9600 of 2007 merits consideration. In
the afore-state of the matter in our opinion no pur-
pose would be served in granting leave as against
the order of the High Court Division dated October
1, 2007 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 3990 of 2007
in rejecting the prayer for bail and that ends of jus-
tice would be served in disposing of the Criminal
Petition for Leave to Appeal upon allowing the peti-
tioner to enjoy the privilege of bail which she is
enjoying un-interruptedly from January 7, 2008 (as
evident from the bail bond at page 16 of the appli-
cation filed by the petitioner to allow her to enjoy
the privilege of bail).
Accordingly, Criminal Petition for Leave to
Appeal No. 146 of 2008 is disposed of upon setting
aside the order of the High Court Division dated
October 1, 2007 rejecting the prayer for bail as
regard the petitioner in Criminal Petition for Leave
to Appeal No. 146 of 2008, The petitioner is
allowed to enjoy the privilege of bail which she is
enjoying since being released upon execution of bail
bond on 7th January, 2008 and shall continue to be
on bail till disposal of the Criminal Appeal No. 3999
of 2007 pending for hearing before the High Court
Division. The petitioner in Criminal Petition for
Leave to Appeal No. 146 of 2008 would not be
required to execute fresh bail bond and shall enjoy
the privilege of bail on the basis of the bail bond
executed in the light of the order of the High Court
Division in Writ Petition No. 9600 of 2007 granting
bail and thereupon has been released.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
MM Ruhul Amin CJ| Aktaruzzaman alias Shahin...
Md Tafazzul Islam J] ........00+ seeeee Appellant
Md Abdul Matin J

vs
Md Abdul Aziz J on

Judgment Abdur Rashid Khan & others
May 26th, 2009 ..-Respondents*

Non-Agricultural Tenancy Act (XXIII of 1949)
Section 24

Pre-emption—The registered deed of purti-
tion is a complete transaction of transfer of own-
ership and possession among the co-sharers,
which put an end to co-sharership.

Section 94

Pre-emption—Passing of final decree in par-
tition suit implies that all the directions in respect
of distributing and separating the Saham of the
parties contained in the preliminary decree was
complied with, nothing remains to be executed
after the passing of the final decree and there-
fore it is wrong to imply that the final decree has
to be executed for the separation of the Saham
land.

*Civil Appeal Nos. 100-102 of 2006.

(From the judgment and order dated 3rd Novembe!.
2004 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision
No. 614 of 1998 and Civil Revision No. 615 of 1998 wil”
Civil Revision No. 524 of 1998).

            
pre-emption
After passing of the final deeree in partition
suit, it is effective between the admitted co-shar-
ers and for the purpose of a pre-emption 4
ceeding were the transfer is made by a co-sharer
fo a stranger.
pre-emption
The passing of the final decree in a partition
suit finally determines the right of the co-sharers
in the land, (19)

pre-emption
The application for the pre-emptor on the
basis of co-sharership is not maintainable. ...(19)

Partition Suit
Partition suit ending in a final decree or an
amicable partition of the property among the
admitted co-sharer through a registered deed of
partition put an absolute end to co-sharership for
all practical purpose irrespective of separation or
splitting of land or Jama through mutation pro-
ceeding.
Right of pre-emption
Final decree in a partition suit for a regis-
tered deed of partition put an end to co-shar-
ership extinguishing his right of pre-emption. (21)
SM Basiruddin vs Zahurul Islam 35 DLR (AD) 230;
Shafiuddin vs Md Abdul Karim 52 DLR (AD) 41; Md
Muzaffar Khan vs Md Yusuf Khan 11 DLR (SC) 78;
Brindaban Chandra Chowdhury vs Rezia Begum 16 DLR
‘7and Rokeya Begum vs Md Nurul Absar | ADC 247 ref.
Mahmudul Islam and Abdul Quayum, Senior
Advocates, (Probir Neogi, Advocate with them), instruct-
ed by Syed Mahbubur Rahman, Advocate-on-Record —
For the Appellant (In all the Appeals).
Abdul Wadud Bhuiyan Senior Advocate, instructed
by AKM Shahidul Hug, Advocate-on-Record—For the
Respondent No.1 (In all the Appeals).

Not Represented —For the Respondent Nos. 2-15 (In
all the Appeals).

Judgment

Md Abdul Aziz.J: These appe
out of the judgment and order dated 113-04 passed
by a Single Bench of the High Court Division in
Civil Revision Nos.524, 614 and 615 of 1998 mak-
ing absolute the Rule obtained in Civil Revision
No.524 of 1998 and discharging the Rules obtained
in Civil Revision Nos.614 and 615 of 1998.

2. The Civil Revision No.524 of 199% was
filed by the pre-emptor and Civil Revision No.614
of 1998 and Civil Revision No.615 of 1998 were
filed by the pre-emptee against the judgment and
order dated 4-11-1997 passed in Miscellaneous
Appeal No.13 of 1987 filed by the preemptor and
the Cross Objection No.31 of 1987 filed by the pre-
emptee, dismissing the both by the Court of
Additional District Judge, Patuakhali and affirming
the judgment and order dated 27-1-1987 passed by
the learned Subordinate Judge (Now joint District
Judge), Patuakhali in Miscellaneous Case No.27 of
1983 allowing the same in part filed under section
24 of the Non-Agricultural Tenancy Act.

6 by leave arose

3. These appeals involve common question of
law and identical facts and having heard analogous-
ly are being disposed of by this common judgment.

4. Facts, in short, are that the pre-emptor filed
the Miscellaneous Case, stating, infer alia, that plot
No.5351 appertaining to khatian No.1739 belonged
to Rajjab Ali Khan and he was survived by two sons,
one daughter and a widow, that widow of Rajjab Ali
Khan gifted her share to her daughter, that Ashman
Ali Khan, vendor opposite-party No.2, predecessor
of respondent Nos. 2-13, being one of the sons of
Rajjab Ali Khan, sold 380 sashasrangsha from plot
No.5351 to the pre-emptee-opposite-party No.|-
appellant by kabala dated 23-1-1983, that the pre-
emptor-respondent No.2 came to know about the
said transfer on 28-1-1983 and thereupon tiled the
application under section 24 of the Non-Agricultural
Tenancy Act seeking preemption of the land claim-
ing to be co-sharer by inheritance and that he is in
need of the case land and the structure standing
thereon, and the pre-emptee-purchaser is a stran,
to the case land, etc.

            
5. The prayer for preemption was resisted by
the pre-emptee-opposite-party No. 1-appellant, stat-
ing, infer alia, that pre-emptor is not a co-sharer of
the case land but a contiguous land owner, that land
of plot No.S351 was partitioned by a registered deed
of partition amongst all the co-sharers before the
impugned kabala dated 23-1-1983 and there has
been separation of the holding and the parties are in
enjoyment separately of their respective share by
constructing different structures having separate
boundaries, that father of the pre-emptee-purchaser
had been in possession of the demised land with
structures as a bharatia under the vendor, and he
(pre-emptee) made improvements spending Taka
20,457, that application under section 24 of the NAT
Act is not maintainable since the land was separated
by partition, that there was no change of possession
and the pre-emptee is in enjoyment of the property
as per earlier possession, etc.

6. Trial Court, on consideration of the evi-
dence, both oral and documentary, allowed the prayer
for preemption in part i.e. to the extent of '/, of the
land transferred. As against the judgment and order of
the trial Court, pre-emptor filed Miscellaneous Appeal
No.13 of 1987 and the pre-emptee filed cross objec-
tion No.31 of 1987. the lower appellate Court dis-
missed the appeal as well as the cross objection.

7. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with
the judgment and order of the lower appellate Court,
the pre-emptor and the pre-emptee moved the High
Court Division by filing aforesaid civil revisions
and obtained Rules. The learned Single Judge of the
High Court Division upon hearing the parties made
the Rule absolute obtained in Civil Revision No.524
of 1998 by the preemptor and discharged the Rules
obtained in Civil Revision Nos.614 and 615 of 1998
obtained by pre-emptee-appellant vide
impugned judgment and order dated 3-11-2004.


8. The learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division passed the impugned judgment holding
that mere existence of the partition deed ipso facto
does not cease co-sharership without splitting up of
the Jama within the meaning of section 24 of the
Non-Agricultural Tenancy Act.

9, Against the judgment and order of the High
Court Division, the pre-emptce-petitioner filed civil
petitions for leave to Appeal Nos.139-141 of 2005
before this Division and obtained leave to appeal in
all the petition on 3-7-2006 to consider the follow-
ing grounds +

"The High Court Division failed to consid-
er that once the properties among co-sharers are
partitioned by a registered partition deed show.
ing possession in specific share, co-sharership
under section 24 of the NAT Act ceases ang
separation of tenancy is not necessary. The
High Court Division failed to consider Exhibit.
A (partition deed), Exhibit-B (impugned kabala)
and Exhibit-C (agreement for sale) wherein spe-
cific possession is shown with boundaries and
also failed to reverse the finding of the appellate
Court about partition. The High Court Division
failed to appreciate that co-sharership in a non-
agricultural land ceases on partition and did not
consider the concurrent finding that plot
No.5351 was partitioned amongst the co-sharers
and did not also consider that in the partition
deed the pre-emptor is a party to the document
and none of the co-sharers has challenged the
document incorporating the partition and thus
the High Court Division committed error of law
occasioning failure of justice."

Mr Mahmudul Islam, the learned Senior
Counsel, appearing for the appellant, argued that the
learned Single Judge of the High Court Division
failed to consider that once the land is partitioned
amicably and voluntarily by a registered partition
deed amongst co-sharers or by a final decree passed
in a partition suit showing specific share and pos-
session to all the co-sharers, co-sharership in the
land ceases for the purpose of preemption under sec-
tion 24 of NAT Act and it does not require separa-
tion of holding or splitting up of the Jama. He
argued that the learned Single Judge has committed
an error of law occasioning failure of justice in
reassessing the evidence disturbing concurrent find-
ing of fact of the Courts below about partition
between the co-sharers and also tailed to consider
Exhibit-A_ partition deed, Exhibit-B impugned

            
kabala and exhibit-C agreement for sale and did not
reverse the concurrent finding of the Courts below
that Plot No.5351 was partitioned amongst the co-
sharers and the preemptor was a party to the parti-
tion deed and none of the co-sharers challenged the
same (Exhibit-A) which incorporates both the
agreement and the kabala deed showing separate
possession with boundary walls consequent upon
partition and as such the impugned judgment and
iable to be set aside. Mr Islam also argued
ion misunderstood and order is
that the High Court Division:
misconstrued the decision of the case of SM
Basiruddin vs Zahurul Islam Chowdhury reported in
35 DLR (AD) 230 and in the case of Md Muzaffar
Khan vs Md Yusuf Khan reported in /] DLR (SC) 78.

19. Mr Mahmudul Islam, the learned Counsel
for the appellant, relied upon the case-laws in the
case of SM Basiruddin vs Zahurul Islam Chowdhury
reported in 35 DLR (AD) 230 and Shafiuddin vs Md
Abdul Karim reported in 52 DLR (AD) 41.

1. On the other hand, Mr Abdul Wadud
Bhuiyan, the learned Senior Counsel appearing in
support of the impugned judgment for the pre-emp-
tor-respondent No.1, Vehemently opposed the
appeals controverting the submissions made by the
leamed Counsel for the appellant, contending that
mere existence of a registered deed of partition does
not extinguish the status of co-sharership unless and
until the Jama of the land is splited up and separat-
ed and that the partition deed in made only for the
convenience of possession of the co-sharers in the
case land and as such the judgment and order of the
High Court Division is sustainable in law. He con-
tinues that right of preemption under section 24 of
the Non-Agricultural and Tenancy Act is not lost
with the partition and co-sharership in the land
transferred does not cease due to registered deed of
partition amongst the co-sharers when there is no
splitting up of the holding and the Jama is not sepa-
rated by opening a new khatian pursuant to regis-
tered deed of partition and therefore, the interpreta-
tion given by the learned Single Judge of the High
Court Division on the right of pre-emptor under sec-
tion 24 of the Non-Agricultural and Tenancy Act is
correct and is in consonance with law. He also
argues that under section 24 of the Non-Agricultural
and Tenancy Act a co-sharer loses his co-sharership
in the tenancy or holding by separation of Jama
through mutation proceeding and the principle is
equally applicable in both the cases of Agricultural
and Non-Agricultural land and the High Court
Division has thus rightly passed the impugned judy-
ment and order. He contends that a final decree
passed in a partition suit for amicable partition sep
arates and divides the land for the purpose of pos-
session only, but does not ipso facto terminate co-
sharership in such land till subdivision of holdi
and distribution of rents takes place in accordance
with law, and as such, the respondent still continues
to remain as a co-sharer in the case land and is enti-
tled to exercise his right or preemption which has
rightly been held by the High Court Division cor-
rectly considering the Exhibits-A, B and C.

Mr Bhuiyan referred the cases of Md Mucaffiar
Khan vs Md Yusuf Khan reported in /] DLR (SC) 78,
the case of Brindaban Chandra Chowdhury vs Rezia
Begum reported in 16 DLR 77, Rokeya Begum vs Md
Nurul Absar reported in | ADC 247.

13. We have heard the leamed Counsels of
both the sides, perused the impugned judgment of
the High Court Division and those of the lower
Courts and other materials available on record.

14, There is no dispute that the case land
sought to be preempted by the preemptor-respon-
dent was amicably partitioned among the co-sharers
by the registered partition deed to which among
other co-sharers both the preemptor and the vendor-
Opposite-party No.2 were parties and the vendor-
Opposite-party No.2 sold it to the pre-emptee-appel-
lant by registered kabala after partition.

15, The moot question in the case as argued by
the learned Counsels of both the parties is whether
either a registered partition deed or final decree in 2
Partition suit puts an end to the co-sharership in the
land so partitioned or whether the co-sharership
continuous till the same is separated and splited up
by separation of Jama through mutation.

            
 16. Substance of the submissions of Mr
Mahmudul Islam, the learned Counsel for the pre-
emptee-appellant is that a registered partition deed
or a final decree passed in a partition suit is a com-
plete transaction of transfer of ownership and pos-
session of the respective shares/shaham of the land
partitioned among the co-sharers and it finally
determines and cease co-sharership and is binding
on the co-sharers, who are parties to the same and
separation of Jama is not necessary to cease their co-
sharership in the land so partitioned and divided
among the co-sharers, On the contrary, according to
Mr Bhuiyan, the learned Counsel for the pre-emp-
tor-respondent, a registered deed of partition is a
document of peaceful possession in the respective
land of the co-sharers and not of change of owner-
ship of the land and an end to the status of co-shar-
ership unless and until Jama of the case land is split-
ed up and separated by mutation and it does not
extinguish the right of preemption of the pre-emptor
under section 24 of the NAT Act.

17. The registered partition deed vide
Annexure-A shows that the case land was amicably
partitioned among the co-sharers and they were put
to possession of the respective land allotted to them.
Both the preemptor and vendor are parties to the
said deed, Consequent upon such partition, the ven-
dor vide Exhibit-B sold the case land to the appel-
lant pursuant to an agreement vide Annexure-C,
None of the co-sharers challenged the said regis-
tered deed to partition. In the said deed vide
Annexure-A, the kabala vide Exhibit-B and the
agreement vide Exhibit-C have been incorporated.

18. On perusal of the decisions cited by Mr
Islam, we find substance in his submissions that the
registered deed of partition is a complete transaction
of transfer of ownership and possession among the
co-sharers, which put an end to co-sharership. The
decision reported in 35 DLR (AD) 230 was a splited
judgment and the majority view lend support to Mr
Islam. The learned Single Judge of the High Court
Division relying on the minority view of the judg-
ment made the Rule absolute in Civil Revision
No.524 of 1998 and discharged the Rules issued in

Civil Revision Nos.614 and 615 of 1998 on an erro.
neous finding that a partition deed does not extin.
guish and cease co-sharership without splitting up oy
the Jama within the meaning of section 24 of Noy.
Agricultural and Tenancy Act.

19. In the decision reported in 52 DLR (Ap),
41, their Lordships were of the view that passing ,;
final decree in partition suit implies that all the
directions in respect of distributing and separatin.
the Saham of the parties contained in the prelimi.
nary decree was complied with the nothing remain,
to be executed after the passing of the final decreg
and therefore it is wrong to imply that the fina
decree has to be executed for the separation of the
Saham land. Their Lordships were also of the view
that after passing of the final decree in partition suit,
it is effective between the admitted co-sharers and
for the purpose of a pre-emption proceeding were
the transfer is made by a co-sharer to a stranger. In
that view of the matter, the passing of the final
decree in a partition suit finally determines the right
of the co-sharers in the land. Hence, the application
for the pre-emptor-respondent on the basis of co-
sharership is not maintainable. Partition suit ending
ina final decree or an amicable partition of the prop-
erty among the admitted co-sharer through a regis-
tered deed of partition put an absolute end to co-
sharership for all practical purpose irrespective of
separation or splitting of land or Jama through
mutation proceeding.

20. The decisions cited by Mr Bhuiyan, the
learned Counsel for the respondent does not apply in
the instant case.

21. In consideration of the decisions reported i
35 DLR (AD) 230 and 52 DLR (AD) 41 as above. we
are of the opinion that a final decree in a partition suit
for a registered deed of partition put an end to co-
sharership extinguishing his right of pre-emption.

22. In that view of the matter, we find merit in
the appeals and the impugned judgment and order
passed by the learned Single Judge of the High
Court Division is liable to be set aside being not sus-
tainable in law.


            
 The appeals re accordingly allowed without
any order as to cost, The impugned judgment and
order dated 11-3-2004 passed by the learned Si

Judge of the High Court Division is hereby set

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Land Acquisition Offi
Pabna & others...Appellants

Md Ruhul Amin CJ
MM Ruhul Amin J
Md Tafazzul Islam J
Md Hassan Ameen J
Judgment
May 18th, 2007.

er,

vs

Md Abdul Latif Biswas and
another..........Respondents*

Acquisition and Requisition of Immova-
ble Property Ordinance (11 of 1982)
Section 46

Rules of 1983 |r. 8(3)|—The report relating
to costs of the constructions made in the acquired
land filed by the Private Engineering Firm ought
not to have been taken into consideration by the
Arbitrator and having had taken into considera-
tion the said unauthorized report of the Private
Engineering Firm in assessing the costs of con-
structions in the acquired land in awarding costs
for construction, the appellate Court was quite
correct in setting aside the judgment of the
Arbitrator and sending the case back on remand

for fresh trial. aroroh 19)

Interpretation of Statute

Case of public functionary—tIn the case of
public functionary the question of waiver in the
performance of function required by law to be
performed is to be strictly construed and only in
ive conduct of public 

the presence of po:

*Civil Appeal No. 14 of 1999.

(From the judgment dated March 25, 1998 passed by
the High Count Division in Civil Revision Nos.3575 and
3576 of 1995)

Functionary waiver as regard performance of public

function is to be fixed, (21)

Sayeda Mazada Khatun vs BSRS 55 DLR (AD) #2;
Bangladesh vs MF Ltd 44 DLR (AD) 166 and Aminul
jay and Co Ltd. 26 DLR (SC) 33 ret.

Islam vs James Fil

MA Azam Khair, Deputy Atorney-General, instruct-
ed by Md Sajjadul Hug, Advocate-on-Record—For the

Appellants.

MA Wadud Bhuiyan, Advocate, instructed hy Chy
Md Zahangir, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respon

dents,

Judgment
Md Ruhul Amin CJ : This appeal, by leave. is
directed against the judgment dated March 25, 1998
of a Division Bench of the High Court Division in
Civil Revision Nos. 3575 and 3576 of 1995 maki
the Rules absolute obtained in the said civil revision
cases.

2. Civil Revision No.3575 of 1995 was filed
against the judgment dated May 25, 1995 of the
Court of District Judge, Pabna in Miscellancous
Appeal No.39 of 1994 reversing the judgment dated
May 11, 1994 of the Ist Court of Subordinate Judge
int District Judge) Pabna in Arbitration

3. 1 Revision No.3576 of 1995 was
against the judgment dated May 25,1995 of the
Court of District Judge, Pabna in Miscellaneous
Appeal No.45 of 1994 reversing the judgment dated
May 11, 1994 of the Ist Court of Subordinate Judge
(now Joint District Judge) Pabna in Arbitration
Miscellaneous Case No.22 of 1993.

4. Miscellaneous Appeal No.39 of 1994 was
filed by the petitioners, therein respondents, in
Arbitration Miscellaneous Case No.22 of 1993 and
the Miscellaneous Appeal No.45 of 1994 was field
by the Government against the judgment in
Arbitration Miscellaneous Case No.22 of 1993,

5. The Arbitration Miscellaneous Case No.22
of 1993 was field by the respondents herein against

            
award made by the Deputy Commissioner in LA
Case No.98 of 1985-86 which was initiated for req-
uisition and acquisition of 60 decimals of land out of
86 decimals of land owned and possessed by the

respondents herein in connection with extension of
thana compound of Bera Police Station, Pabna,

6. The Deputy Commissioner awarded com-
pensation towards the value of land acquired Taka
288,000 as against claim of the respondents at Taka
1,96,82,000.

7. The respondents herein i.e. petitioners in
the Miscellaneous case received, on protest, Taka
2,88,000 towards the value of the land and there-
upon filed the Arbitration Miscellaneous Case
No.22 of 1993 and therein claim further amount
towards value of the land, compensation for the
structures in the land acquired, business loss etc.
The Arbitrator by his judgment dated May 11,1994
awarded additional compensation in respect of the
land acquired on the following heads:

1. Value of Land Taka 20,51,180
2. Cost of construction Taka 39,31,040
3. Staff Salary Taka —_-8,82,000
4. Business Loss Taka 42,00,000
5. Value of remaining land Taka —_5,01,852

Grand Total : Taka 1,15,66,072

8. The petitioners in the arbitration case and
the opposite parties therein being aggrieved by the
judgment dated May 11, 1994 of the 1st Court of
Subordinate Judge, Pabna in the Arbitration
Miscellaneous case filed appeals as mentioned here-
in above before the Court of District Judge, Pabna.

9. In the Arbitration Miscellaneous case the
respondents herein claim at Taka 1,96,82,000
towards the value of the land acquired.

10. The appellate Court heard the appeals
together and by the common order dated May 25,
1995 made an order of remand for fresh assessment
as the appellate Court round that the relevant law
and the regulation have not been followed in making
the assessment of compensation by the learned

Arbitrator and that as both the parties being
aggrieved by the judgment passed in Arbitration
Miscellaneous case No.22 of 1993 have filed
appeals.

Il. The appellate Court observed “As per
above provision Public Works Department is the
proper authority to assess the value of the building
and others structures of acquired land but in this
case the same was assessed through a private fi
which is not at all acceptable in the eye of law" and
thereupon made the order of remand for assessiny
value of the structures in the land acquired and for
determination and assessment of compensation in
other allied matters.

12. The respondents herein, who were the peti-
tioners in the arbitration case, being aggrieved by
the judgment of the appellate Court moved the High
Court Division in revisional jurisdiction and
obtained the aforesaid rules.

13. A Division Bench of the High Court
Division by the Judgment dated March 25, 1998
made the Rules absolute upon observing that before
the appellate Court it was urged by the appellant in
Miscellaneous Appeal No.45 of 1994 that the trial
Court passed the award on the basis of the
Assessment of value of the building and other strue-
tures as made by a private engineering firm which
was not legal because of the provisions of law as in
Rule 8(3) of the Acquisition of Immovable property
Rules, 1983 published in the gazette on October 31,
1982, but on perusal of the judgment of the
Arbitrator" we find that the Arbitrator did not pas
award solely on the basis of the report of the
"Private Engineering Firm" but also on other mate-
tials on, record" and that the judgment of the
Arbitrator is "well reasoned judgment" and that the
appellate Court set aside the judgment of the
Arbitrator solely on the basis of the submission of
the appellant in the Miscellaneous Appeal No.45 of
1994, that the award as to compensation for building
and structures was made on the basis of the report of
the Private Engineering Firm and thereupon held
that the order of the remand passed by the Appellate
Court was not legally sustainable since there was no

            
material" irregularity and illegality’
 in the judgement of the Arbitrator.

14. The leave was granted for considering the
contentions that the law requires ascertainment of
compensation for construction and structures in
consultation with Public Works Department and the
appeal having been allowed for having not consult-
ed the said department in assessment of the cost of
construction, the High Court Division committed
error of law apparent on the face of the record in
making the Rules absolute upon a view that the legal
requirement can be supplanted by other evidence
and as such the High Court Division was wrong in
rejecting the application for review, that assessment
of compensation (for business loss, staff salary and
diminution of the value of the unacquired land) by
the Arbitrator being ex-facie not tenable in law and
the appeal having been allowed and the case
remanded because both the parties filed appeals
agianst the assessment of compensation by the
Arbitrator, the High Court Division committed error
of law apparent on the face of the record making the
Rules absolute without adverting to the reasons
assigned by the appellate Court for remand.

15. It may be mentioned that the appellants
herein filed an application seeking review of the
judgment dated February 18, 1997 passed in civil
revision cases and the same was rejected on March
25,1998 upon observing "Learned Advocate appear-
ing for the applicant failed to satisfy us that there in
any ground in terms of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC to
review our judgment and order. It is unfortunate that
a frivolous application has been filed to waste time."

16. Thereupon the appellants filed petition for
leave to appeal against the order rejecting the review
application filed seeking review of the judgment dated
February 18, 1997 in Civil Revision Nos.3575 and
3576 of 1995 as well as against the order dated
February 18, 1997 passed in Civil Revision Nos. 3575
and 3576 of 1995 making the Rules absolute upon set-
ling aside the judgment and order of the appellate
Court in Appeal Nos. 39 and 45 of 1994 and thereupon
restoring the judgment and order dated May 11, 1994
in Arbitration Miscellaneous Case No.22 of 1993.

17. The learned Deputy Attorney-General in
support of the appeal submitted that awardi
compensation on the & of the report of a Priv
Engineering Firm was contrary to the provision of
law since law requires that compensation in respect
of buildings, including pucca and katcha structures
is to be determined in consultation of the Public
Works department and the appellate Court havii
had noticed that the learned Arbitrator awarded the
compensation for the constructions and structures
on the basis of the report of Private Engineering
Firm which was violation of the law as in Rule 8(3)
of the Rules, 1983 (framed as per provision of sec-
tion 46 of Ordinance II of 1982) and thereupon set
aside the judgment of the learned Arbitrator and
remanded the case to the trial Court for assessment
of compensation in the light of the provision of law,
but the High Court Division erroneously held that
the learned Arbitrator did not assess the compe
tion for constructions and structures on the basis of
the report of Private Engineering Firm alone but
also on other materials on record, through there was
no other materials on record for the purpose of
assessing compensation for the constructions made
in the land acquired except the report of the-Private
Engineering Firm and the Advocate Commission
which is evident from the judgment of the learned
Arbitrator in Miscellaneous Case No.22 of 1993. In
support of his contention the learned Deputy
Attorney-General has referred to the judgment of
the learned Arbitrator wherein it has been observed
that petitioners, i.e. respondents herein, approached
the authority, Executive Engineer, Public Works
Department, Pabna for assessment of compensation
of the constructions made by them in the acquired
land, "But this effort went in vain because of the fact
that the authority was least interested to determine
valuation of the structure. So during trial he prayed
before the Court for appointment of a Private Firm
to assess the valuation of the construction made in
the acquired land" and the said firm was appointed
and."The firm after physical inspection of the land
prepared and submitted survey report and valuation
certificate. Md Ismail Hossain an Assistant Engineer


            
SEWA ASSOCIATES LTD as PW 5 in his testimo-
ny stated that after inspection and taking measure-
ment, they have assessed the valuation", The learned
Arbitrator in the background of the aforesaid obser-
vations awarded compensation at Taka 39,31,000
towards cost of construction, The learned Deputy
Attorney-General placing reliance on the aforesaid
finding and observation of the learned Arbitrator
relating to awarding of costs of constructions sub-
mitted that the High Court Division was in error in
holding that the learned Arbitrator did not solely
relied upon the report of the Private Engineering
Firm while awarding cost for constructions. The
submissions so made appears to be of merit since we
have noticed in the judgment of the learned
Arbitrator that he solely relied while awarding cost
for construction on the report of the Private
Engineering Firm which was quite contrary to the
provision of law as in Rule 8(3) of the Rules, 1983
which runs as follows:

"In case of acquisition of any building,
including pucca or kutcha, the market value
shall be determined keeping in view the cost of
construction, cost on development of land
including approaches and depreciation of build-
ing in consultation with Public Works
Department."

18. It appears from the judgment of the learned
Arbitrator that it was submitted from the side of the
petitioners in the Arbitration Miscellaneous case
that they approached the Executive Engineer, Public
Works Department for assessment of compensation
of the construction in the acquired land, but there
was no response from the side of the requisitioning
authority or for that matter Public Works
Department and thereupon they applied to the
learned Arbitrator for appointment of the Private
Engineering Firm for ascertaining costs of the con-
structions made in the acquired land and the said
prayer was allowed. The Private Engineering Firm
so appointed submitted its report relating to costs of
constructions made in the acquired land and upon
accepting the said report the learned Arbitrator
awarded cost for construction.

19. In our opinion the learned Arbitrator
instead of allowing the prayer for appointment of
Private Engineering firm for assessment of the costs
of the constructions made in the acquired land ought
to have directed the Public Works Department to do
the duty relating to the assessment of compensation
of the constructions made in the acquired land as per
requirement of the law. The learned Arbitrator hav-
ing had not done so, his action in allowing the
prayer for appointment of a Private Engineering
Firm on the prayer of the petitioners in the
Arbitration Miscellaneous case for assessment of
the compensation as regard the constructions made
in the acquired land was not legal, rather was clear
violation of the law and as such the report relating to
costs of the constructions made in the acquired and
filed by the Private Engineering Firm ought not to
have been taken into consideration by the learned
Arbitrator and he having had taken into considera-
tion the said unauthorized report of the Private
Engineering Firm in assessing the costs of construc-
tions in the acquired land in awarding costs for con-
struction, the appellate Court was quite correct in
setting aside the judgment of the learned Arbitrator
and sending the case back on remand for fresh trial,

20. It has been submitted on behalf of respon-
dents that there was no illegality in the action of the
learned Arbitrator in allowing the prayer for
appointment of a Private Engineering Firm for
assessment of compensation as regard the construc-
tions made in the acquired land by the petitioners in
the Arbitration case, since they approached the
Public Works Department but the said department
did not response to the request made for nent
of compensation of the buildings and other struc
tures in the acquired land. The learned counsel for
the respondents submitted that the appellants having
had not responded to the request of the respondents
for assessment of the compensation fo the buildings
and other structures in the acquired land thereby
they have waved their right as provides in Rule §(3)
of the Acquisition of Immovable Property Rules.
1983 (the Rules). In support of the said contention
the learned counsel has referred to the case of
Sayeda Mazada Khatun vs BSRS reported in 55 DLR


            
(AD) 82 and placed reliance on the part of the judg-
ment relating to waiver and the came runs as

"Waiver is the abandonment of a right and
is cither express or implied from conduct, A
person Who is entitled to the benefit of a stipu-
jation in a contract or of a statutory provision
may Waive it or allow the contract or transac
tion 10 proceed as though the stipulation or pro-
vision docs not exist, Waiver of this kind
depends upon consent and the fact that other
party has acted upon it is sufficient considera-
tion, Where the waiver is not express it may be
implied from conduct which is inconsistent
with the continuance of the right".

21. The submission made upon referring to the
aforesaid part of the judgment in the reported case in
the background of the facts of the instant case is
hardly of any useful purpose for the respondents
because of the fact that when application was made
for appointment of a Private Engineering Firm for
assessment of compensation, the learned Arbitrator
instead of accepting the said prayer ought to have
taken steps for performance of the public duty by
the Government functionary as per provision of law
and he having had not done so we find no merit in
the submission of the learned counsel that Public
Works Department waved its right of assessing com-
pensation in respect of the construction made in the
acquired land. From the judgment of the learned
Arbitrator it is not seen that there was express or
implied conduction of the public functionary. In the
case of public functionary the question of waiver in
the performance of function required by law to be
performed is to be strictly construed and only in the
presence of positive conduct of public functionary
waiver as regard performance of public function is
to be fixed.

22. The learned Counsel for the respondents
has submitted that the provision in Rule 8(3) of the
Rules is directory and not being mandatory in
nature, non-compliance of the provision of the said
Rule did not affect the judgment of the learned
Arbitrator. In support of the aforesaid contention the

learned counsel has referred to the case of Aminul
Islam vs James Finlay and Co Lid. reported in 26
DLR (SC) 33 and placed reliance on the following
Portion of the judgment.

"When a public duty is imposed and the
Statute requires that it shall be performed in a
certain manner, or within a certain time or
under other specified conditions, such prescrip-
tions may be regarded as intended to be diree-
tory only in cases when injustice or inconven-
ience to others who have to control over those
exercising the duty would result if such require-
ments where essential and imperative."

23. The learned counsel has also referred to the
case of Secretary, Ministry of Food, Food Division,
Government of Bangladesh vs MF Ltd reported in
44 DLR (AD) 166 and placed reliance on the fol-
lowing portion of the judgment.

"In the Statutory Law of Craies, absolute or
mandatory enactments have been distinguished
from enactments which are mere directory or
enabling provisions; failure to comply with a
mandatory rule invalidates and action, whereas
failure to comply with a directory rule does not
invalidate an action."

24. The observations, referred to by the learned
counsel for the respondents in the reported cases, in
our opinion in the background of the instant appeal
has hardly of any relevance to the question whether
the provision in Rule 8(3) of the Rules is mandatory
or directory since in the instant case the Court at the
first instance was required to make direction to the
Public Works Department to assess the compensa-
tion for the constructions made in the acquired land
by the owners and the Court was not powerless to
enforce the provision of law as in Rule 8(3) of the
Rules and the Court having had not gone for that,
and in the instead had allowed the prayer of the
owners of the acquired land for appointment of a
Private Engineering Firm for assessing the costs of
buildings and other structures in the acquired land,
the Court acted in a manner which had no sanction

            
of law. We are of the view that when a party
approaches a Court for a direction as regard certain
matter, the Court would be required to look into as
for address is the matter as to whieh the prayer for direction has been sought and if there is any law the Court would certainly be required to act in accordance with the Jaw touching the matter as to which a party in the proceeding sought for direction from the Court.
In the instant case the Court having had not done so,
the action of the Court in allowing the prayer for
appointment of a Private Engineering Firm for
assessment of the buildings and other structures in
the acquired land acted in violation of the law and as
such the said action of the Court has no legal sanc-
tion. In our view acceptance of plea of Waiver or in
other words entertaining the plea of Waiver as
regard performance of public function as requires to
be done by the law on particular matter would be
disastrous to discipline in the performance of public
functions by the public functionaries and thereby
allowing anarchy in the performance of function by
public functionaries as per mandate of law or in due
compliance of law to whether there is any law providing.

25. In the afore state of the matter we are of the
view the High Court Division was in error in inter-
fering with the judgment of the appellate Court set-
ting aside the judgment of learned Arbitrator which
was passed in violation of the law relating to assess-
ment of the compensation as regard the buildings
and other structures made’ in the acquired land by a
Private Engineering Firm and making the report so
filed by the said Private Engineering Firm as the
basis for awarding ‘compensation as regard the
buildings and other structures in the acquired land.

26. In the background of the discussion made
hereinabove we find merit in the appeal.

Accordingly, the appeal is allowed without any
order as to costs.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)

Md Fazlul Karim J | Major (Retd) Quazi Hasna
Md Joynul Abedin J. | Hena Begum......Appellant
Md Hassan Ameen J vs
Lt. Col. Kazi
Islam and others .
-Respondents*
Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 102

Principle of Natural Justice—Since the sin-
gle allotment was cancelled and the joint 

Judgment Mansurul

April 6th, 2008.

allotment was done with the full consent and at the
behest of the writ petitioner no question of issu-
ing of show cause notice or for assigning any rea-
son was required and accordingly there could be
no violation of principle of natural justice.

Under the circumstances and in the context
of the above-admitted fact subsequent challenge
thereto is also barred by the principle of waiver
quishment of his

and acquiescence and re!
lier sanction letter in the single name. This writ
petition is barred by the principle of waiver,

acquiescence.

nd

In the instant case, therefore, the facts proved has

given rise to waiver and acquiescence, waiver i.e. abandonment of right and acquiescence for which the writ petitioner is estopped from challenging or alleged enforcement of his previous allotment in the single name. The conduct of the writ petitioner, however, clearly manifests that a Court of law can reasonably and validly make an inference of waiver and acquiescence. Even act of the writ
petitioner-respondent and his participation in subsequent transaction do not, however, show any of his unwillingness or lack of consent at any time of the transaction. The writ respondent as well participated in the transaction by contributing sufficient fund at her disposal even at the

*Civil Appeal No.162 of 2003.
(From the judgment and order dated the 16th day o!

August, 2000 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No.1236 of 1997).

            
stage of construction of the building as has been detailed in her affidavit-in-opposition,
Accordingly, the conduct of the parties sufficiently
manifests the principle of estoppel of waiver and acquies steal (12, 14-16)
cence as well.
Akhlasur Rahman vs Safarullah 42 DLR (AD) 189 ref.
Rokanuddin Mahmud, Senior Advocate with Sk
Hasan Arif Advocate, appeared with the leave instructed
ay Bivash Chandra Biswas, Advocate-on-Record—For
the Appellant,
Khandaker Mahbubuddin Ahmed, Senior Advocate
instructed by Md Nawab Ali, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent No.1.

Mvi. Md Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record—For the
Respondent Nos.2-4.

Judgment

Md Fazlul Karim J : This Appeal, by leave, is
directed against the judgment and order dated 16-8-
2000 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition No.1236 of 1997 making the Rule absolute.

2. This case of respondent No.1 as writ peti-
tioner was that while serving in Bangladesh Army
he applied for allotment of a plot in Johar-sahara
residential project on 10-12-1991. Thereafter, at his
request he was allotted an alternative Plot No.281/C
at Mohakhali DOHS on 23-5-1993. Vacant posses-
sion was delivered and lease deed was executed on
10-6-1993. He applied for approval of the plan and
after obtaining necessary approval of the plan from
the Cantonment Board, mortgaged the said plot and
obtained loan for construction of residential build-
ing thereon. After obtaining a loan of Taka 12 lacs to
be paid in 6 instalments of Taka 2 lacs each from
House Building Finance Corporation he constructed
structure upto 2nd floor of the 6(six) storied build-
ing. At that time he suddenly got a letter from the
office of the Dhaka Cantonment requesting him for
his opinion for allotment of the plot in the joint
name with his wife by a letter dated 28-6-1994. He
replied that there would be legal difficulties in joint
allotment and therefore, refused the proposal for
joint allotment with his wife's name who is the peti-
tioner before us. His further case was that the allot-
ment authority considering his representation
agianst the joint allotment and legal difficulties. uni-
laterally converted the single allotment into the joint
allotment on 30-10-1994 and a lease deed of joint
allotment was executed on 5-11-1994. It was also
stated by him that the petitioner's wife, as per clause
6 of the prospective of defence officers’ housing
project, was not entitled to apply for joint allotment
of any plot as she had not. completed 18 years com-
mission service in the Army and she was also owner
of a government residential plot at Chittagong, She
was also. not in service. at the. time of the alleged
joint allotment and the same was done with malatide
intention and to harass him.

3. The High Court Division issued Rule Nisi
upon the writ respondents to show cause as to shy
the letter of allotment dated 30-10-1994 issued by
the Director, Military Land and Cantonment
Directorate Ministry of defence, so far as it relates to
the writ respondent No.4, the present petitioner
should not be declared to have been made without
lawful authority and was of no legal effect and why
the allotment of the entire plot should not be given
in favour of the writ petitioner respondent No.1.

4. The Rule was opposed by the writ respon-
dent No.2, Director, Military Land and Cantonment
Directorate Ministry of Defence and writ respondent
No.4 petitioner's wife of writ petitioner respondent
No.1. It was stated that writ respondent No:2'upon a
request by the writ petitioner forwarded a proposal
to the Ministry of Defence to allot the plot jointly
and necessary approval was given by the Ministry
after cancelling the previous allotment in favour of
the writ petitioner respondent No.1 as per condi
No.6(Ga) of the prospectus of defence oflicers’
housing project. The Military Land and Cantonment
Directorate by their letter dated 30-8-1994 request-
ed the writ petitioner to surrender his pr
and he surrendered the case plot by registered sur-
render deed on 8-9-1994 and informed the office by



            
his letter dated 15-9-1994, The case plot was
accordingly allotted jointly in the names of the writ
petitioner and his wife respondent No.4 according to
the wish and consent of the writ petitioner, The writ
respondent No.4 in her aflidavit-in-opposition, inter
alia, stated that her husband, writ petitioner does not
live at the address given in the writ petition and as a
matter of fact she lives at that address i.e. House
No.281/C, Road No.19/C now DOHS along with
her son and daughters. She is in exclusive posses-
sion of the house on the allotted plot in question.
The writ petitioner had left the house and was
reportedly living with his second wife at Shamoly.
The application for allotment of plot filed by the
writ petitioner was intended to be on his own behalf
and on behalf of the respondent No.4 as contemplat-
ed in clause 6(Ga) of the said prospectus of the
housing project which provides that in case of the
husband and wife both serving in the Army the sen-
ior of the two would have to apply and the plot
would be allotted in their joint names. The writ peti-
tioner was the senior officer and as such, he applied
for allotment of the plot and as per law the single
allotment of the writ petitioner was converted to
joint allotment and accordingly registered lease
deed dated 5-11-1994 was executed in joint names.
The respondent No.4 petitioner claimed that she had
provided Taka 5,68,000 to her husband writ peti-
tioner respondent No.1 for the purpose of construc-
tion of the house. She also stated that the writ peti-
tioner respondent No.1 applied for loan of Taka
35,00,000 from Sonali Bank in joint names by forg-
ing her signature in 1995. She got a letter from the
Bank with a request to register the mortgage deed,
which she refused. This made her husband writ peti-
tioner respondent No.1 angry and he started to tor-
ture her physically and accordingly, filed the
malafide and false case.

5. Leave was granted to consider the submis-
sion of Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud, learned Counsel,
appearing for the appellant that the letter of joint
allotment dated 30-10-1994, acting in terms thereof,
the Government having executed a registered lease
deed dated 5-11-1994 in favour of writ petitioner
and leave petitioner in their joint names, the writ
petition challenging the allotment letter alone,
which has been fully acted upon is not maintainable
inasmuch as after the execution of the registered
lease decd, the allotment letter either has lost its effi.
cacy or merged in to the registered deed that has cre.
ated a vested right under it in favour of the leave
petitioner and writ petitioner jointly and as such
there remained nothing to challenge the allotmen,
letter, and the High Court Division was wrong in
making the Rule absolute declaring the allotment
letter in joint names illegal whereas the revistered
deed executed and registered with consent at the
behest of the writ petitioner which gives the title to
both remains valid in law and thereby the High
Court Division's judgment has created an anomaly,
contradiction and paradox; that the respondent No,
by letter dated 31-7-1994 cancelled the earlier single
allotment in favour of writ petitioner and directed
registration in joint names, whereupon the writ peti-
tioner wrote letters dated 15-9-1994 and 6-10-1994
surrendering the registration in his single name and
requesting for registration in joint names as a result
of which allotment letter dated 30-10-1994 in joint
names was issued and thereafter execution and rey-
istration of the lease deed in favour of writ petition-
er and leave petitioner took place, the High Court
Division was wrong in failing to hold that the writ
petition raised complicated issue of title in the prop-
erty in question as well a disputed question of fact
which could not be decided in writ petition but the
same needed a properly constituted suit for adjudi-
cation; that the writ petitioner admittedly surren-
dered the plot relinquishing his right, title and inter-
est thereon and requested for a joint allotment and as
such barred by the principles of waiver, acquies-
cence and estoppel from questioning the legality of
allotment in joint names.

6. Mr Rokanuddin Mahmud, learned
Counsel, appearing for the appellant submitted that
since the joint allotment of plot is violative of allot-
ment Rules disqualifying the appellant for allotment
either individually or jointly for which the allotment
was initially made through the writ petitioner being
the husband and senior officer under the Rules. It
has been further submitted that the joint application


            
for allotment thus being barred under the Rules, the
appellant subsequently filed the application after the
sanction of the plot in favour of husband for the said
allotment in her name as well and accordingly the
authority With the full consent of the initial allottee
who has accordingly sought for cancellation of the
allotment in his name and applied for joint allotment
and accordingly registered deed of lease in joint
name WaS registered cancelling the previous regis-
tration lease in single name whereby the appellant as
well has acquired title and vested right in the prop-
erty.

7. Khondaker Mahbubuddin Ahmed, learned
Counsel, appearing for the respondent submitted
that on the very basis of the registered lease deed has
no legal effect, the deed even if registered cannot
create better title or any vested right in favour of the
appellant, that the registered lease deed cannot
remain valid in law if found by a competent Court;
that the office of the ‘QMG' and 'M & Q'
Depariment, Dhaka Cantonment issued Memo dated
6-1994 requesting the petitioner to send his opin-
jon regarding allotment of his plot in joint names of
which the writ petitioner gave a reply on 28-6-1994
expressing legal difficulties in joint allotment which
in fact disclosed his mind regarding joint allotment
and therefore subsequent registration on surrender-
ing the single allotment in the facts and circum-
stances. Finally, the learned Counsel submitted that
there was no violation of the terms and conditions of
the single allotment by the respondent and as such,
the subsequent joint allotment for no fault of the
respondent against which the respondent raised
objection is arbitrary and malafide; that the joint
allotment impugned in the writ petition having been
issued without any show cause and without assign-
ing any reason is clearly against the principle of nat-
ural justice. The learned Counsel further submitted
that in pursuance of joint letter of allotment dated
30-10-1994 acting in terms thereof, the Government
executed a registered lease deed dated 5-11-1994
inasmuch the complicated title in the property in
question as well as disputed question of fact which
could not be decided in the writ jurisdiction which
needed a properly constituted Court of law for adju-
dication of principle of waiver and acquiescence and
estoppel from questioning the legality of allotment
in joint names.

8. It appears that the writ petitioner on his
own initiative filed an application to the authority
for considering joint allotment of the plot cancelling
the single allotment in his name which the authority
in terms of letter dated 13-10-1994 allowed the
prayer of the writ petitioner and cancelled the earli-
er allotment in his own name and registered deed to
that effect and the Government as well acted upon
the executed registered lease deed dated 5-11-1994
in favour of the writ petitioner and the appellant in
their joint names and accordingly the alleged chal-
lenge claimed on the basis of single allotment in the
writ petition which the writ petitioner himself
prayed for cancellation of the same and subsequent
registration of the plot thereon and the authority has
acted upon the same. The impugned allotment letter
dated 30-10-1994 in the joint name in Annexure-G
was of no avail and the writ petition, accordingly,
Was not maintainable. The writ petitioner himself on
his own and to his own volition allowed the single
allotment dated 23-5-1993 of the Plot No.281/C
Mohakhali DOHS cancelled upon his application
for allotment of the plot in joint name which the
authority was pleased to allow and thereafter, issued
sanction letter in joint name and got the registered
deed registered in joint name with the consent and
co-operation of the writ petitioner which according-
ly could not be subject matter of challenge in a writ
jurisdiction. It will not be out of place to mention
that clause 6(Kha) provides that in case of an appli-
cation for allotment of a plot if the spouses are in the
service the qualification for allotment of a plot
would be in the name of the senior and accordingly
the plot was allotted in the name of the husband ini-
tially and upon consent of the husband thereatter,
the said plot was allotted in the joint name and fol-
lowing 6(Ga) the registration was done in joint
name upon an application for allotment of plot by
the senior officer i.e. the husband, writ petitioner
who after allotment for the reason best known to
him got the plot allotted and registered in his own
name alone instead of joint name. After sanction of


            
plot, the said plot would be allotted following the
clause 6(Ga) allowed in joint name. It will not be out
of place to mention that the writ petitioner having
realized his fault by the letter to the authority
applied for cancellation of the plot in his own name
and accordingly the said letter dated 31-7-1994 in
favour of the writ petitioner was cancelled and was
directed for registration of the plot in joint name
upon the request of the writ petitioner by his letter
dated 15-9-1994 and 6-10-1994 surrendered the reg-
istered deed in his single name with the request for
registration of the plot in joint name. As a result, the
violation of the allotment letter dated 30-10-1994 in
the joint name was issued and the registration deed
to lease was accordingly executed and registered in
joint name.

9. The High Court Division observed that :
“the whole argument of the learned Counsel for the
petitioner is that admittedly the’ petitioner had got
the single allotment but the respondent No.4 without
having any requisite qualification managed to force
the petitioner to execute and register the joint allot-
ment in respect of the suit plot have no basis of law.
The petitioner at the very beginning was unwilling
to the joint allotment but being in active service in
army he had no other alternative but to give consent
for the sake of service and family bondage. The peti-
tioner being a member of the disciplined force had
to give his consent and this aspect of the case can
not be altogether brushed aside in view of the letter
of the respondent to the Ministry of Home Affairs
vide Annexure-3 of the aflidavit-in-opposition."

10. In writ jurisdiction the disputed question of
fact or any doubt that might crop up could not be
resolved in the writ petition. In the instant case, the
High Court Division has acted upon, inter alia, on
those ‘if and ‘but’ without allowing the parties to
resolve the same in an appropriate forum but in a
cursory manner disposing of the writ petition filed
challenging the order which the writ petitioner him-
self has given yo-by and consequently fresh order of
allotment and registered deed was executed in the
name of husband and wife,

11. Admittedly, the writ petitioner surrendered
the single allotment in his own name alone and for
following provision of rule 6(Ga) of the Army
Officer residential project prospectus Rule 6(Ga)
which reads Git aiferice Dress wh ¢ Ha cory
DIAS Cab] ofertas Bic whe eee ome 25
Yue tare ware ZBc4 1 The alleged letter of the
office of QMG and M&Q department, Dhaka
Cantonment dated 22-6-1994 and alleged reply
dated 28-6-1994 of the writ petitioner was a product
of afterthought which was not there during the allot-
ment and registration of the deed in the joint name
and accordingly the joint allotment is of no fault of
the appellant against which the writ petitioner raised
objection is without any basis and surely as such a
matter of afterthought which cropped up after the
love lost between the husband and wife and a sub-
ject matter of disputed question of fact.

12. Since the single allotment was cancelled
and the joint allotment was done with the full con-
sent and at the behest of the writ petitioner no que
tion of issuing of show cause notice or for assigni
any reason was required and according
be no violation of principle of natural justice.

13. Furthermore, we are of the view that in the
instant case in view of the admitted joint allotment
in the name of husband and wife and subsequent
registration of the lease deed in joint name upon
cancellation of the previous allotment and transi-
tion in single name on the prayer of the writ peti-
tioner. Moreover, the writ petitioner received Taka
5,68,000 from respondent No.4 appellant for the
purpose of procuring the plot and construction work
as evidenced from General Irrevocable Power of
Attorney executed by the writ petitioner on 4-!!-
1993. Construction of the ground floor of the house
and structural works of the 1st and 2nd floors were
also done by the fund provided by Respondent No.4
appellant inasmuch as the writ petitioner a
received Taka 3,06,000 from respondent No.4 for
completion of the construction work and this fact is
evidenced in the 'Receipt and Agreement’ dated 20-
11-1994 executed between the writ petitioner and
respondent No.4 appellant. The aforesaid documents



            
 are also annexed Annexure-9 and 9A in
afidavit-in-opposition Taka 10,00,000 out of
12,00,000 was also received by the petitioner from
house building finance corporation as loan and was
deposited by hin in his own name in Istamia‘Umma
Corporation as evidenced from an application dated
10.6-19%6 of the petitioner regarding the said
deposit and @ money receipt dated 26-01-1995
annexed as Annexure-10 and 10A in affidavit-in-
opposition, Purthermore, the petitioner applied for a
joan of Taka 35,00,000 from Sonali Bank, Dhaka
Cantonment Branch in joint names though forging
signature of respondent No.4-appellant and drew the
money by opening joint account in 1995.

14. Under the circumstances and in the context
of the above-almitted fact subsequent challenge
thereto is also barred by the principle of waiver and
acquiescence and relinquishment of his earlier sanc-
tion letter in the single name. This writ petition is
barred by the principle of waiver, and acquiescence.
The propositions of waiver and acquiescence have
been aptly discussed in the case of Akhlasur
Rahman vs Safarullah reported in 42 DLR (AD) 189.
The words 'waiver' and ‘acquiescence’ and the aban-
donment of the right was aptly considered in
Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Volume
14, page 637 wherein it is stated that "Wavier, is the
abandonment of the right, and is either expressed or
implied from conduct of a person who is entitled to
the benefit of a stipulation in a contract or a statuto-
Ty provision may waive it, and allow the contract or
transaction to proceed as though the stipulation or
provision did not exist. Waiver of this kind depends
upon consent and the fact that the other party has
acted upon it is sufficient consideration. Where the
waiver is not expressed, it may be implied from
conduct, which is inconsistent with the continuance
of the right. It seems that, in general, where one
party has, by his words or conduct, made to the other
@ promise or assurance which was intended to affect
the legal relations between them and to be acted on
accordingly, then once the other party has taken him
at his word and acted on it, the party who gave the
Promise or assurance cannot afterwards be allowed

to revert to the previous legal relationship as if no
such promise or assurance had been made by him,
but they must accept their legal relations subject to
the qualification which he himself has to introduet-
ed, even though is not supported in point of law by
any consideration." In the same volume at page 63%
it has been stated that "acquiescence" in its proper
legal sense implies that a person abstains from inter-
fering while a violation of his legal rights is in
progress and further that "Acquiescence operates by
way of estoppels. It is acquiescence in such circum-
stances that assent may reasonably be inferred, and
is an instance of estoppels by words or conduct.
Consequently, if the whole circumstances are prop-
er for raising these estoppels, the party in acquivs-
cence cannot afterwards complain of the violation of
his right."

15. In the instant case, therefore, the facts
proved has given rise to waiver and acquiescence.
waiver i.e. abandonment of right and acquiescence
for which the writ petitioner is estopped from chal-
lenging or alleged enforcement of his previous allot-
ment in the single name. The conduct of the writ
petitioner, however, clearly manifests that a Court of
Jaw can reasonably and validly make an inference of
waiver and acquiescence. Even act of the writ peti-
tioner-respondent and his participation in subse-
quent transaction do not, however, show any of his
unwillingness or lack of consent at any time of the
transaction. The writ respondent as well participated
in the transaction by contributing sufficient fund at
her disposal even at the stage of construction of the
building as has been detailed in her affidavit in
opposition.

16. Accordingly, the conduct of the parties suf
ficiently manifests the principle of estoppel of waiv-
er and acquiescence as well.
In view of the above, the appeal is allowed
without any order as to costs.

Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
Sufia

MM Ruhul Amin CJ Khatoon

........... Petitioner

Md Tafazzul Islam J]... eceees
Md Abdul Matin J
Md Abdul Aziz J v8
Judgment Mahbuba Rahman and others

Respondents*

May 18th, 2009.

Emergency Acquisition of Property Act
(XI of 1948)
Section 8B

From the scheme of the law it appears that

section 93A provided a complete law for requ
tion and acquisition of the property and also pay-
ment of compensation and as per section
93(4)(h), once the property is requisitioned under
this law the same shall vest absolutely in the
Board free from all encumbrances and the peri-
od of such requisition of such property shall end.

From a close reading of the above section it appears
that section $B deals with withdrawal from the acquisition
of those lands which were acquired under section 5 of the
Act of 1948 and not the land acquired under any other law
(16, 18)

i.e. Town Improvement Act, 1953.

Section 8B

Admittedly the land in question were
acquired under section 93A of the Town
Improvement Act and the same vested in the Board
free from all encumbrances and therefore the
Government cannot release the same taking resort
to section 8B as quoted above of the Act of 1948.

Once compensation has been paid it reaches
its finality and thereafter such land cannot be
released even under the Act of 1948.

*Civil Petition for leave to Appeal Nos. 2052-2054 of
2008.

(From the judgment and order dated 15-11-2007
passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition
Nos.11817, 11818 and 11819 of 2006).

It is pertinent to mention here that accordiny ty
Salmond a precedent is a judicial d

ion, which contain,
in itself'a principle. The underlying principle, which thus
forms its authoritative clement, is often termed the ratio
decidendi, The concrete decision is binding betw

en the
parties to it but it is the abstract ratio decidendi. whieh

alone has the force of law as regards the world at la

Moreover the High Court Division has rightly termey
the judgment passed in Writ Petition No.835 of 1977 as
not binding being a judgment ‘per incuriam’ and it is set.
tled principle that a judgment ‘per incuriam’ of a judyment
sub silentio do no constitute a precedent. Further more
those cases are passed and closed transaction and will not
be affected by the present judgment as we are adopting he
doctrine of prospective overruling to restrict our decision
to the present case and to the future cases.

aed (19, 21, 24-25)

Abdul Huq vs Bangladesh 9 BLC (AD) 56; Sadeque
Uddin Ahmed vs Rajdhani Unnayan Kartipakha (RAJUK)
3 MLR (AD) 91; Abdul Mannan vs Bangladesh 27 DLR
597 and Bangladesh vs Commercial Trust of Bangladesh
46 DLR (AD) 89 ref.

Rafique-ul-Hug, Senior Advocate and Syed Amir-ul
Islam Senior Advocate instructed by Md Abu Siddique

Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner (In all cases),

AF Hassan Ariff, Senior Advoeate instructed hy
Waliul Islam, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondeny
No.8 (In all cases).

Khalilur Rahman, Advocate instructed by Zahirul
Islam, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent No.1 (In
CP No.2052 of 2008).

Fida M Kamal, Senior Advocate instructed by
Zahirul Islam, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent
No.1 (In CP No.2053 of 2008).

Anwarul

izim Khan, Advocate instructed by Zahirul
Islam, Advocate-on-Record—For Respondent No.1 (In
CP No.2084 of 2008).

            
Not represented—For the Respondent Nos.2-7 (In all

cases).

Judgment
Md Abdul Matin J: These petitions for leave to
appeal are directed against the judgment and order
dated 15-11-2007 passed by the High Court
Division in Writ Petition No.11817 of 2006 (heard
analogously with Writ Petition Nos.5198 of 2003,
Writ Petition No,11818 of 2006, Writ Petition
No.11819 of 2006 and Writ Petition No.3466 of

2004 making the Rule absolute.

2, Since common question of law and facts
are involved in all the petitions these are being dis-
posed of under this judgment,

3. In Writ Petition No.S198 of 2003 the
respondent as the petitioner, Rajdhani Unnayan
Kartipakha (RAJUK) challenged the gazette notifi-
cation dated 2-8-2001 as evidenced by Annexure-B
to the writ petition. In Writ Petition Nos.11317,
11818, 11819 of 2006 and 3466 of 2007 the respon-
dents as petitioners challenged the gazette notifica-
tion bearing memo No.Bhu:Ma:/Sha-10/Hu:tha:/
Dhaka-11/92-3691, dated 13-10-1999 as published
in Bangladesh Gazette on 11-11-1999,

4. The short facts leading to the petition for
leave to appeal are as follows :

In Writ Petition No.5198 of 2003, the property
in question was acquired in LA Case No.10 of 1963-
64 as per the provisions of section 93A of the Town
Improvement Act, 1553. The Government by the
said gazette notification withdrew 14.68 acres of
land from acquisition exercising the power con-
ferred under section 8B of the Emergency
Acquisition of Property Act, 1948. The case of the
writ petitioner was that the authority cannot publish
such gazette notification exercising the power con-
ferred under section 8B of the Act of 1948 as the
same was already repealed with effect from 13-3-
1982 and being aggrieved moved the writ petitions
and obtained a Rule.

In Writ Petition Nos.11817, 11818, 11819 of
2006 and 3466 of 2007 the respective petitioners on
an advertisement made by RAJUK applied for allot-
ment of plots. On the basis of their applications the
RAJUK issued formal allotment letters in their
favour, Pursuant to the allotment letters the respec-
tive petitioners paid in full the royalty/premium to
the lessor namely RAJUK and after satisfaction the
lessor namely RAJUK executed registered lease
deeds for 99 years of the respective plots as men-
tioned in these writ petitions with the respondent
petitioner and also handed over formal possession
thereof. The further case of the writ petitioners is
that they constructed houses as per approved plan
and have been enjoying and possessing the same.
All ona sudden, some people entered into the prem-
ises and claimed ownership of the said plots by
virtue of sale deeds obtained from the original own-
ers from whom the aforesaid land was acquired by
the lessor as per Town Improvement Act of 1953.
On query the Writ petitioners came to know that the
Ministry of Land issued a gazette notification which
was impugned in all the writ petitions wherein the
Ministry of Land released certain portion of land
from acquisition exercising the power conferred
under section 8B of the Act of 1948.

In Writ Petition No.5198 of 2001 though notice
were served in accordance with law but the same
was not contested by any respondents in any man-
ner. In Writ Petition No.3466 of 2007 the respondent
No.8 (RAJUK) contested the Rule by filing affi-
davits-in-opposition whereas respondent No.7 (one
Mst Sufia Khatun) contested in Writ Petition Nos.
11817 11818 and 11819 of 2006 by filing affidavits-
in-opposition as well as respondent No. 8 (RAJUK)
entered appearance by filing power. The case of the
respondent No.7 in the aforesaid three writ petitions
is that the contention raised by the petitioners are
misconceived one and the same has been denied by
the respondents. The respondent No.7 purchased the
land from the persons whose predecessor-in-interest
was the original landlord and admittedly the land
was acquired in LA Case No.10 of 1963-64 but the
requiring authority decided to derequisition certain

            
portion of land which attracts the purchased lands of
the respondent No.7. On one occasion the authori-
ties refused to release the land to one Mr Khademul
Islam Chowdhury who being aggrieved preferred
Writ Petition No.835 of 1977 wherein the High
Court Division after hearing the parties made the
Rule absolute. On review the High Court Division
maintained the earlier order and the appeal by
RAJUK to the Appellate Division was summarily
rejected, The further case of the respondent No.7 is
that by virtue of the decision of the Apex Court, the
Ministry of Land issued a memo dated 8-2-1999
cancelling the entire proceeding of LA Case No.10
of 1963-64 and by virtue of that letter the Ministry
of land issued the gazette notification and as such
the same cannot be interfered with by the Court in a
proceeding under Article 102 of the Constitution.
The further case of the respondent No.7 was that the
Writ Petition No.11817 of 2006 is not maintainable,
as the said application was preferred by a constitut-
ed Attorney.

5. After hearing the High Court Division
madéall the Rules absolute.

6. Being aggrieved by the judgment and order
of the High Court Division, the petitioners have
filed these petitions for leave to appeal.

7. Heard .Mr  Rafique-ul-Hugq, learned
Counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr AF
Hasan Ariff, learned Counsel appearing for the
respondent No.8 and others and perused the petition
and the impugned judgment and order of the High
Court Division and other papers on record.

8. The question that was raised before the
High Court Division was whether a property
acquired under a Jaw can be released under the pro-
vision of another law, in other wards, the property in
questions acquired under section 93A of the Town
Improvement Act whether could be released under
section 8B of the (Emergency) Requisition of
Property Act 1984 and the High Court Division
answered the question in the negative.

9. Mr Rafiq-ul-Huq, learned Counsel appear.
ing for the petitioner mainly argued that the Tespon-
dent No.7 of the writ petition i.e. petitioner herein
purchased the land from its original owner by r
tered kabala dated 14-11-1973 and respondent No, y
RAJUK took decision for abandonment of the project
and for de-requisition of the same in between 1969.
1971 and the question of derequisition reached ity
finality at the judgment and order dated 12-7-1979 of
Writ Petition No.835 of 1977 and as such the question
of allocation of any land from the land of said LA
Case by the respondent No.8 dated 16-11-1995 ang
lease deed dated 23-12-1997 (Annexure-B and 1-2
respectively) being totally absurd and cannot be sus-
tained in law and the High Court Division seriously
erred in Law in making the Rule absolute.

10. He further submitted that in view of the
decision of the Appellate Division, relating to same
plot of land (plot No.367) and also the same Gazette
Notification dated 11-11-1999, given in Civil
Appeal Nos.36 and 37 of 1998, the decision of the
High Court Division is illegal and contrary to
Article 111 of the Constitution.

11. Mr AF Hassan Arif, learned Counsel
appearing for the respondent No.8 submitted that in
view of the provisions of section 93A of the Town
Improvement Act, 1953 under which the acquisition
process was started in the concerned LA Case
No.10/1963-1964 and the provision of section
73(Uma) of the town Improvement (Amendment)
Act, 1987 (Act, xxix of 1987) continuing the provi-
sion of section 93A for such proceeding, the
impugned order of derequisition purportedly issued
under section 8B of the (Emergency) Requisition of
Property Act, 1948 is totally without lawful author-
ity and is of no legal effect.

12. He further submitted that the concerned
acquisition proceeding in LA Case No.10/1963-
1964 having been initiated and completed by acqui-
sition and vesting the land with the Board under sec-
tion 93A of the Town improvement Act, 1953 pur-
ported derequisition is meaningless and is of no
legal effect and as such should be struck down.

            
13. He submitted that the Board under the
Town Improvement Act, 1953 being the lawful
owner of the land acquisitioned and having duly
allotted and leased out to the respondent and others:
after making improvement of the land at huge cost
and valuable right and interest of third parties hav-
ing been created thereon, the respondents have no
awtitl authority to disturb such past and closed
transaction.

14. He lastly submitted that the order of with-
drawal from acquisition have been made after pay-
ment of compensation to the land owner, the same is
direct. contravention of section 8B of The
(Emergency) Requisition of Property Act, 1948 and
as such, the same is made without lawful authority
and is of no legal effect.

15. Town Improvement Act, 1953 was enacted
in the year 1953 and section 93A was inserted in the
said Act by East Pakistan Ordinance No.49 of 1953
and the same was amended from time to time. sec-
tion 93A(1) nuns as under :

"93A(1). Requisition of property for any
scheme—When any immovable property is
required by the Board for carrying out any of
the purposes of this Act, the Government may
direct the Deputy Commissioner to requisition
such property for the Board by an order in writ-
ing:

Provided that no property used by the pub-
lic for the purpose of religious worship shall be
requisitioned."

Section 93(4)(h) runs as under :

"The Government shall then publish in the
official gazette a notice to the effect that the
Government has decided to acquire the requisi-
tioned property for the Board. On and from the
beginning of the day on which the notice is so
published, the requisitioned property shall vest
absolutely in the Board free from all encum-
brances and the period of such requisition of
such property shall end."

16. From the scheme of the law it appeal
93A provided a complete law for re
acquisition of the property and also paymet
compensation and as per section 93(4)(h), one
property is requisitioned under his law the
shall vest absolutely in the Board free from
encumbrances and the period of such requisition of
such property shall end.

17. Admittedly the property in question was
acquired as per section 93A of the Town
Improvement Act 1953 and it vested in RAJUK free
from all encumbrances.

Section 8B of the Requisition of Property Act.
1948 runs as under :

"8B. Withdrawal from Acquisition—When
the owner of any property which has been
acquired under section 5 is willing to receive
back the property, the Government may, at any
time before the payment of compensation, with-
draw from the acquisition of any such property
by notification published in the Official
Gazette, and on such withdrawal, the property
shall be restored to the possession of the owner,
and with effect from the date of.such restora-
tion, the property shall vest back in the owner
with the rights which he had before such prop-
erty was acquired."

18. From a close reading of the above section
it appears that section 8B deals with withdrawal
from the acquisition of those lands which were
acquired under section S of the Act of 1948 and not
the land acquired under any other law i.e. Town
Improvement Act, 1953.

19. Admittedly the land in question were
acquired under section 93A of the Town
Improvement Act and the same vested in the Board
free from all encumbrances and therefore the
Government cannot release the same taking resort to
section 8B as quoted above of the Act of 1948,

20. This view was taken by this Court in the
case Abdul Hug vs Bangladesh reported in 9 BLC
(AD) 56 and in the case of Sadeque Uddin Ahmed vs

            
Rajdhani Unnayan Kartipakha (RAJUK) reported in
3 MLR (AD) 91.

21. It further appears from the above section
that once compensation has been paid it reaches its
finality and thereafter such land cannot be released

even under the Act of 1948.

22. As to the judgment of the High Court
Division in Writ Petition No. 835 of 1977 and the
judgment of this Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 36 and
37 of 1998 and the judgment of this Court in Civil
Petition for Leave to Appeal No.122 of 2000 suffice
it to say that the question whether Government was
competent to release the land acquired under section
93A of the Town Improvement Act that vested in
RAJUK could be released by the Government was
not at all an issue and therefore those judgments
have no bearing on these cases where the compe-

tence of the Government in releasing the land of ©

RAJUK has been challenged.

23. In those cases the question whether the
land even if acquired under section 5 of the Act of
1948 could be released after payment of compensa-
tion was also not an issue and therefore are not
applicable in these cases. In the case of Abdul
Mannan vs Ministry of Land Administration and
Land Reforms, Govt. of Bangladesh reported in 27
DLR 597 it was held that once compensation is paid
the acquisition process reaches its finality and the
land cannot be de-requisitioned under section 8B of
the Emergency Requisition of Property Act, 1948.
This view was approved by this Court in the case of
Bangladesh represented by the Secretary, Ministry
of Land Administration and Land Reforms ys
Commercial Trust of Bangladesh reported in 46
DLR (AD) 89 wherein it was held that "after com-
pensation is paid for acquisition of land no order can
be made for derequisition of such land."

24. It is pertinent to mention here that accord-
ing to Salmond a precedent is a judicial decision,
which contains in itself a principle. The underlying
principle, which thus forms its authoritative ele-
ment, is often termed the ratio decidendi. The con-
crete decision is binding between the parties to it but

it is the abstract ratio decidendi, which alone has the
force of law as regards the world at large,

25. Moreover the High Court Division hay
rightly termed the judgment passed in Writ Petition
No.835 of 1977 as not binding being a judgment ‘per
incuriam’ and it is settled principle that a judgmeny
‘per incuriam' or a judgment sub silentio do not con.
stitute a precedent. Further more those cases ary
passed and closed transaction and will not be affect.
ed by the present judgment as we are adopting the
doctrine of prospective overruling to restrict. our
decision to the present case and to the future cases,

With the above observations all the leave peti-
tions are dismissed.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)
Md Fazlul Karim J | Jahedul Islam @ Jabed
Md Joynul Abedin J | u...........:eeeeeee
SAN Mominur
Rahman J
Judgment
May 26th, 2009.

«++-Petitioner
vs

State

Respondent*

Arms Act (XI of 1878)
Sections 19(a) & 19(f

Having regard to the submissions made by
the learned Advocate as well as the manner of
arrest of the convict-petitioner after chnging
them following the encounter in the face of firing

by the convicts towards the police force and the
recovery of the arms and ammunitions from
their possession, we are of the view that discrep-
ancies pointed out by the learned Advocate can-
not disprove charges levelled against the convict-

*Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No.157 of
2008.

(From the judgment and order dated 24-9-2007
passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal No.
3973 of 2003).

            
petitioner, The convict-petitioner and others
were caught red handed, The High Court
Division considered the materials and evidence

on record and on detailed discussion has correet-
ly arrived aC its decision dismissing the appeal.

Mahbubur Rahman Khan alias Tipu vs State 1996
BLD (AD) 268; Tuta Pramanik vs State 59 DLR 492 and
SM Kamal vs State 6 BLC 113 ref.

AKM Shahidul Hug, Advocate-on-Record — For the

Petitioner.

Not Represented — For the Respondent,

Judgment

SAN Mominur Rahman J: Instant leave petition
is directed against the judgment and order dated 24-
9-2007 passed by a Division Bench of the High
Court Division in Criminal Appeal No,3973 of 2003
dismissing the appeal affirming the conviction and
sentence passed in Special Tribunal Case No.100 of
2000 by the Special Tribunal Court No.5,
Chittagong, sentencing the convict-petitioner to suf-
fer rigorous imprisonment for 14 years for convic-
tion under section 19(a) of the Arms Act and to suf-
fer rigorous imprisonment for 10 years for convic-
tion under section 19(f) of the Arms Act and the sen-
tence to run concurrently.

2. The convict-petitioner was apprehended on
7-9-1999 after exchange of fire in an encounter with
the police along with fire arms and ammunitions and
accordingly the seizure list was prepared and an FIR
was lodged being Chandgoan PS Case No.1] dated
7-9-1999 under sections 19(a) and 19(f) of the Arms
Act read with section 26 of the Special Powers Act,
1974 which corresponds to GR No.632 of 1999 and
afer investigation charge sheet was submitted and
in due course, following the procedure of the
Criminal Procedure Code, regular case being
Special Tribunal Case No.100 of 2000 was regis-
tered in the Court No.1 of the Metro Assistant

Tribunal
and

No.5,
other

Sessions Judge and Spe
Chittagong. The convict-petitioner
accused in their examination under section 342 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure claimed innocence
and demanded trial. 13 witnesses were adduced by
prosecution, of them PWs | and 4 deposed to the

effect that fire arms were recovered from the con-
vict-petitioner.

3. On consideration of the materials and evi-
dence on record the Special Tribunal found the
charges levelled against the convict-petitioner and
four others under section 19(a) and 19(f) of the
Arms Act were proved and accordingly sentenced
them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 14
agianst section 19(a) and 10 years of rigorous
imprisonment agianst 19(f) of the Arms Act, which
are to run concurrently,

4, The convict-petitioner, being aggrieved,
preferred Criminal Appeal No.3973 of 2003 to the
High Court Division under section 30 of the Special
Powers Act, 1974 and the High Court Division
heard the appeal and dismissed the same by the
impugned judgment and order dated 24-9-2007
observing that :

"We have perused the impugned judgment
and order, the evidences and the record and
heard the submissions of the learned Advocates
of both sides. In this case prosecution examined
12 witnesses including the informant who was.
the investigating officer of this case PW 1, Sub-
Inspector Md Abdul Haque is the information
of this case. He has narrated the prosecution
case in detail and proved the first information
report and the seizure list. PW 2 constable 2627
Md Jafar Iqbal who was one of the members of
the patrol party has corroborated the evidence
of PW I, PW 3, Md Mobarak Hossain is also a
member of the patrol party. He has reproduced
the statement of PW 1 PW 4 is another police
personnel who has corroborated PW 1-3 PW 5
Md Shahjahan is the seizure list witness who
has given obliging statement stating that he
signed on blank paper. PW 6 another seizure list

            
witness has followed the suit of PW 5 PW 7
also stated the same PW 8 is the police person-
nel who was member of patrol party PW 9 Sub-
Inspector Md Abdul Kalam on the alleged date
was duty officer at the Chandgoan Police
Station, He recorded the first information
report, which has been marked Exhibit 3 and
his signature Exhibit 3/1 PW 10 Dipok Dewan
is the police Officer serving at Boalkhali Police
Station. He verified the PCPR of convict
Masum PW 11 Sub-Inspector Saidur Rahman is
another police Officer of Doudkandi Police
Station verified the PCPR of convict Mongal
Miah. PW 12 Abdul Jabbar Another Police
Officer of Anwara Police Station verified the
PCPR of convict Al Amin @ Alam PW | inves-
tigated this case and his evidence has been fur-
ther recorded as PW 13. From the evidences it
has been proved that the appellant was appre-
hended along with the other convicts by the
police personnel in an encounter a country
made LG, with a cartridge was recovered. The
learned Assistant Attorney-General has relied in
the decisions reported in 59 DLR 492; 1996
BLD (AD) 268. In the case of SM Kamal vs
State 6 BLC 113 it has been observed that other
public seizure-list witnesses did not support the
Prosecution case in spite of that there is no legal
bar to convict the appellant on the unimpeach-
able evidence of the police. Therefore, we find
that the charges framed under section 10(a) and
19(f) of the Arms Act have been proved against
the appellant beyond all reasonable doubt and
the learned Tribunal taking compassionate view
awarded minimum sentence which is to run
concurrently."

5. We have perused the leave petition, the
impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court Division and the judgment passed by the
Special Tribunal as well as the depositions, copy of
which are annexed to the leave petition. We have
also considered the submission made by the learned
Advocate appearing for the leave petitioner, The
learned Advocate submitted that the High Court

Division erred in law in not considering the discrep.
ancies appearing in the depositions of the PW | and
PW 4 in respect of the arms recovered from the con.
vict-petitioner and also in not considering the depo.
sitions of the witnesses to the seizure list, why
denied to have seen the recovery of arms from the
convict-petitioner and hat the seizure list witnesses
PW 6 and PW 7 in their respective deposition stated
that they did not see any recovery of arm from the
convict-petitioner and, as such, the conviction of the
convict-petitioner is illegal and without any basis,

6. On perusal of the depositions as well as the
judgments passed by the Special Tribunal and the
High Court Division in the instant case and having
regard to the submissions made by the learned
Advocate as well as the manner of arrest of the con-
vict-petitioner after chasing them following the
encounter in the face of firing’ by the convicts
towards the police force and the recovery of the
arms and ammunitions from their possession, we are
of the view that discrepancies pointed out by the
learned Advocate cannot disprove charges levelled
against the convict-petitioner. The convict-petition-
er and others were caught red handed. The Hi
Court Division considered the materials and evi-
dence on record and on detailed discussion, as quot-
ed hereinabove, has correctly arrived at its decision
dismissing the appeal and upholding the conviction
and sentence passed by Special Tribunal.

7. In the premises, we do not find illegality
the impugned judgment and order and thus there is
no merit in the application.

Accordingly, the petition for leave to appeal is
dismissed.

Ed.

            
 APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
Mahmudul Amin | Government of Bangladesh

Choudhury CJ and others .....066 Appellants
Md Ruhul Amin J
KM Hasan J
Judgment

May 6th, 2002.

vs

Administrative Tribunal Act (vil of 1981)
Section 4

The tribunal cannot grant gratuitous relief
and if such a relief is granted the same should be
construed as relief granted in excess of jurisdic-
tion. The Act has not provided for any such
authority to the tribunal to give such a relief as
has been given to the authority in the present
case before us.

Quazi Nazrul Islam vs Bangladesh House Building
Finance Corporation 45 DLR (AD) 106 ref.

AJ Mohamamd Ali, Additional Attorney-General
(Feroz Shah, Assistant Attorney-General with him),
instructed by Mvi Md Wahdullah, Advocate-on-Record —
For the Appellants (In CA No.60 of 1997).

Amir-ul-Islam, Senior Advocate (Tania Amir,
Advocate with him), instructed by Md Nawab Ali,
Advocate-on-Record—Respondent (In CA No. 60 of1997).

Amir-ul-Islam, Senior Advocate (Tania Amir,
Advocate with him), instructed by Md Nawab Ali, Advo-
cate-on-Record—For Appellant (In CA No.61 of 1997).

AJ Mohammad Ali Additional Attorney-General
(Foroz Shah, Assistant Attorney-General with him),
instructed by Mvi Md Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record —
Fort he Respondents (In CA No.61 of 1997).

*Civil Appeal Nos.60 and 61 of 1997.

(From the judgment and order dated 17th February,
1997 passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal,
Dhaka in Appeal No.29 of 1991).

Judgment

Mahmudul Amin Chowdhury CJ : These two
appeals are taken up for disposal which arose out of
judgment and order dated 17th February, 1997
passed by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal.
Dhaka in Appeal No.29 of 1995 allowing the same
with certain observations.

2. The short fact leeading to these appe:
that Md Anwarul Islam, former Police Serz
appellant in Civil Appeal No.6] of 1997 filed
Administrative Tribunal Case No.107 of 199] allez-
ing that earlier he was posted at eastern Police Post,
Dhaa and on 20-6-1984 at dead of night while he
was returning home from duty station at East
Dhanmondi Police outpost he found a Microbus
bearing No. Dhaka-Cha-1456 moving suspiciously
and after a chase he arrested the driver and found
two bales of Indian cloth in the Microbus. He then
escorted the driver and the Microbus and cloths to
Dhanmondi Police Station with the help of another
polcie sergeant and handed over the driver, the
Microbus and two bales of Indian cloth and lodged
First Information Report which was recorded as
Dhanmondi PS Case No.61(6) 84 under section
156(4) of the Customs Act. It is the case of the peti-
tioenr that thereafter he was transferred to Khulna
on 8-7-1984 by the Inspector General of Police
where he joined on 15-7-1984. It is his further case
that Assistant Commissioner of Dhaka Metropolitan
Polcie investigated the case and submitted a report
on 16-7-1984. On 30-7-1984 respondent-petitioner
was suspended by the Metropolitan Police
Commissioner, Dhaka ont he basis of that reprot and
a proceeding drawn up agaisnt him under the Police
Officers (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1976 on a
charge of corruption on the allegation of illegally
releasing 18 bales of Indian cloth seized by him. A
show cause notice was served upon him on 15-10-
1984 to which he submitted a written statement in
his defence on 27-10-1984 denying all the charges
brought against him. In that proceedng was fixed for
personal hearing before the inquiry officer where he
appeared but was not heard. Then the inquiry officer
completed the inquiry but the copy of thecharge
sheet of the Dhanmondi Police Station case was not


            
  supplied to him and thereby he was denied the
opportunity of defence. Then by order dated 17-11-
1984 he was compulsorily retired from service.
Then the respondent preferred appeal which w:
rejected on 7-3-1985 Then again revisional applica-
tion was filed on 30-3-1985 which was also rejected
on 16-1-1991 and thereafter the aforesaid case
before the Administrative Tribunal was filed on 28-
4.1991,

3. The case was contested by appellant No. 2
the Inspector General of Police by filing a written
statement denying the meterial allegations. It was
the case of the contesting party that from the
Microbus 20 bales of Indian cloths were seized but
after producing only two bales to the duty officer the
first information report was lodged stating that only
two bales were seized consequent to which a depart-
mental proceeding was started against the respon-
dent on charge of misconduct and corruption under
Clause 4(1) and 4(IV) of the aforesaid Ordinance of
1976 and after observing the formalities including
second show cause notice respondent was compul-
sorily retired from service on 17-1-1984 under the
aforesaid Ordinance.

4. Before the Administrative Tribunal both
the parties adduced evidence and the Tribunal on
consideration of the same by judgment dated 18-2-
1995 dismissed the case on two counts, firstly that
the case is time barred and secondly that no illegal-
ity has been committed in passing the order of com-
pulsory retirement.

5. On being aggrieved by the order of dis-
missal of the case respondent preferred Appeal No.
29 of 1995 before the Administrative Appellate
Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal on hearing
allowed the appeal, set aside the order of the
Administrative Tribunal and declared that the
respondent is still in service and entitled to all ben-
efits upon setting aside the order of compulsory
reurement. The Administrative Tribunal however
observed that the competent authority will be at lib-
erly to proceed against the respondent afresh on the
same allegation if they so desire and the appellant
will continue to remain in suspension till final order

is passed, The present appellant and the respondent
on being aggrieved by the same judgment of the
Administrative Appellate Tribunal filed two Leave
petitions and leave was granted to consider the fol.
lowing:

"It appears from the impugned judgmen
that the Appellate Tribunal took the view thar
since opposite party No. 3 drew up proceeding
against the petitioner after he had joined
District Police force, Khulna on transfer he (Op
No. 3) had no jurisdiction for taking discipli-
nary action against the petitioner because the
provisions of Regulation No.859 of PRB, and
section 9 of the DMP Ordinance (III of 1976)
provide that when a police detachment is trans-
ferred to another jurisdiction the authority of
taking disciplinary action against that detach-
ment will lie with the competent authority of
the latter jurisdiction for all purposes and the
jurisdiction of the authority of ofrmer station
will cease. The Appellate Tribunal also found
that the application of the petitioner was not
time barred and the decision of the Tribunal
below on that point ws wrong.

6. Mr B Hossain, learned Deputy Attorney
General appearing for the opposite party petitioner
(Civil Petition No.326 of 1997) submits that the
leamed Appellate Tribunal upon a misconception of
law and facts wrongly held that the Metropolitan
Police Commissioner, Dhaka cased to have jurisdic-
tion for taking disciplinary action against the peti-
tioner (respondent) causing failure of justice. He
also submits that the order of compulsory retirement
passed agaisnt the petitioner is protected by section
8 of the Police Officers (Special Provisions)
Ordinance, 1976.

7. Mr Amir-ul-Islam,  larned Advocate
appearing for the petitioner (In Civil Petition
No.330 of 1997) submits that the learned Appellate
Tribunal acted in excess of its jurisdiction by mak-
ing the observation in the judgment as above caus-
ing prejudice to the petitioner. The observation is
liable to be deleted fromt he said impugned judy-
ment, he submits."


            
8. From the perusal of the judgment it appears
that the Adminstrative Tribunal also dismissed the
case on the ground of limitation which was set aside
by the Administrative Appellate Tribunal but leave
was not granted on the point of limitation, Leave was
appellant No.3,
Metropolitan Police Commissioner to pass the
impugned order of compulsory retirement of the
respondent Leave was also granted in the Civil
Petition filed by the respodnentNo. Anwarul Islam
against certain observations made by the
Administrative Appellate Tribunal, The first point
raised by the Additional Attorney General is that the
Administrative Appellate Tribunal committed
wrong and illegality in holding that drawing up of
the proceeding against the respondent by appellant
No. 3 i.e. Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Dhaka
after transfer of the respondent from Dhaka to
Khulna and joining there is contrary to Jaw and dis-
cipline and it is the Superintendent of Police of
Khulna where the respondent was posted on the date
of drawing up proceeding was competent to proceed
with the inquiry
9, Admittedly the respondent was charged for
misconduct alleging that on 20-6-1984 while he was
posted as Sergeant in Dhaka Metropolitan Police he
apprehended a Microbus with a driver and actually
recovered 20 bales of Indian cloth but while lodging
the First Information Report he showed recovery of
only two bales and misappropriated the remaining.
The occurrence took place within Dhaka Metropo-
litan area where the respondent was posted atthe rel-
evant time. On receipt of the First Information
Report fromthe respodnent Dhanondi PS Case No. 6
1(6) 84 was started. Thereafter on 8-7-1984 the
respondent was transferred by the Inspector General
of Police to Khulna where he joined on 15-7-1984.
It is also an admitted fact that on 30-7-1984 the
respondent was placed under suspension and pro-
ceeding was drawn up agaisnt him under Police
Officers (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1976 ona
charge of corruption. It is also an admitted fact that
show cause notice was served upon the respodnent
on 15-10-1984 and he submitted his written state-
ment in his defence on 27-10-1984. He was to be

heard in person on 4-11-1984 by appellant No.3
Subsequently on completion of inquiry report »
submitted and ultimately respondent was compulea-
rily retired from service on 17-11-1984 the
Administrative Appellate Tribunal found that after
transfer of the respodnent from Dhaka to Khulna the

Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Dhaka tus no
authority to initiate proceeding and to pass a
ciplinary order compulsorily retiring the respondent
This procecidng was initiated under the Police
Officers (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1976. The
Administrative Appellate Tribunal placing reliance
on regulation 859 of Police Regulation observed
that the proceeding ought to have been initiated and
conducted by the Superintendent of Police of
Khulna where at the relevant time the respodnent
was posted. Admittedly the occurrence took pal:
while respondent was posted in Metropolitan Police
at Dhaka, Section 6 of the Ordinance provided that
when a police officer is to be proceeded for any of
the offences mentioned in section 4 the authority
concerned shall frame a charge and specify therein
penalty proposed to be imposed and communicate it
to the police officer hereinafter clled "accused"
requiring him to show cause within specified time
which shall not be less than 7 days and not more
than 10 days from the date the charge has been com-
municated to him why penalty proposed to be
imposed shall not be imposed and also to state
whether he desires to be heard in person. Now sec-
tion 2(A) of the Ordinance defined "authority" as the
authority specified in column 2 of the schedule. In
column 2 of the schedule it has been provided that
in case of a sergeant the authority would be Deputy
Inspector General of Police and in case of Metro-
politician area Police Commissioner or Additional
Police Commissioner. Admittedly the respondent
was acting as Sergeant in the Dhaka Metropolitan
Police and as such as per this Ordinance it is the
Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Dhaka or the
Additional Commissioner who was competent to
draw up proceeidng and that has been done in the
present case. Admittedly when the proceeidng was
initiated by the Metropolitan Police Commissioner
the respondent was posted in Khulna, In this
Ordinance there is nothing that in case of transfer


            
before drawing up of proceeding the same should be
drawn up or initiated or proceeded with at the place
where the accused is posted. This Ordinance indi-
cate tht the proceeding may be initiated/drawn up
when the alleged offence has been committed.
Though in Regulation 859 of PRB it has been pro-
vided that the Superintendent of Police where such
an officer is posted will be fully competent to take
any disciplinary action for an offence committed by
such an officer when he was posted outside his juris-
diction but in view of sction 3 of the Ordinance this
Regulation 859 has lost its force as section 3 pro-
vided that this Ordinance shall have effect notwith-
standing anything contained in any law, rules and
regulations relating to police force not shall preju-
dice operation of any other law, Rules and regula-
tions including service conditions of the said police
force. When a proceeding is drawn up against a pol-
cie official under this Ordinance the plea that his
case is to be decided under any other law will have
no effective force. So in the present case regulation
859 cannot be a bar in proceeding with the discipli-
nary action against the respondent by the Metro-
politan Police Commissioner in Dhaka. It is an
admitted fact that the accused respondent was trans-
ferred to Khulna by the Inspector Generral of Polcie
and he has been charged and proceeded with for an
offence committed by him while posted in Dhaka
Metropolitan Police by the Police Commissioner of
Dhaka Metropolitan Police and in view of the clear
provision of the Ordinance we hold tht no illegality
and wrong has been’ committed in this case. Int he
Ordinance there is nothing toshow that in case of
such a nature the concerned authority is required to
send the record of the proceeidng to the Superinten-
dent of Police where the accused has been subse-
quently transferred and when there is no such provi-
sion in the Ordinance and when this Ordinance
override all other laws, rules and regulations we
hold that the Administrative Appellate Tribunal
committed wrong and illegality in allowing the
appeal holding that appellant No.3 i.e. the Police
Commissioner of Dhaka Metropolitan Police had no
jurisdiction in taking disciplinary action agaisnt the
respodnent. In such a case provision of regulation
859 of PRB and section 9 of the DMP Ordinance (III

of 1973) willhave no effect and bar in holding
inquiry and punishing an accused.

10. Having given our anxious consideration
tothe materials on record and after hearing the
learned Advocate of both the sides we hold that the
Administrative Appellate Tribunal committey
wrong and illegality in allowing the appeal.

11. The respodnent also filed Civil Appeal
No.61 of 1997 against certain observation made in
the judgment by the Administrative Appellate
Tribunal. It appears that while disposing ofthe
appeal the Administrative Appellate Tribunal
observed as follows :

"In view however of the facts and circum-
stances of the case we are inclined in the inter-
est of justice to allow the competent authoirty
an opportunity to proceed fresh agaisnt the
appellant on the same allegations."

12. Mr Amir-ul-Islam learned Counsel appear-
ing on behalf of appeallant of Civil Appeal No.61 of
1997 submits that the Administrative Appellate
Tribunal committed gross illegality in passing the
aforesaid order. It is submitted that under the
Administrative Tribunal Act the appellate authority
has no juirsdiction to pass ush an order and in sup-
port of his submission he placed reliance in the case
of Quuzi Nazrul Islam vs BHBFC reported in 45
DLR (AD) 106 wherein it has been held that the
Administrative Tribunal and the Administrative
Appellate Tribunal have been established with a
limited jurisdiction and limited powers. The
Tribunal cannot grant gratuitous relief and if such
telief is granted the same should be construed as
relief granted in excess of jurisdiction. The
Administrative Tribunal Act has not provided for
any such authority tothe Tribunal to give such @
relief as has been given to the authority in the pres-
ent case before us.

13. In view of this we hold that illegality and
wrong has been committed in making the afor
observation which require interference and accord
ingly we are inclined to allow the appeal and delete
the aforesaid observation.


            
14. Civil Appeal No, 60 of 1997 is allowed
without cost as aforesaid, Judgment and order
passed by the Administrative Appelalte Tribunal in
the aforesaid appeal is hereby set aside and these of
the Administrative Tribunal is restored.

15. In Civil Appeal No.61 of 1997 the observa-
tion made by the Appellate Tribunal as aforesai
hereby deleted and the appeal is accordingly dis-
posed of.

No order as to cost.

Ed.
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Civil)
MM Ruhul Amin CJ | Anti-Corruption Commi-

Md Fazlul Karim J
Md Abdul Matin J
ABM Khairul Haque J
Judgment
October 8th, 2009.

ssion.. +osPetitioner

vs

Shamima Begum & others.
avs uaunerNe’ -Respondents*

Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 109
Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 27
Section 109 of the Penal Code is included in
paragraph 'Gha' of the schedule to the ACC Act,
2004 for abetment to any offence under the
schedule is committed by any sort of involvement
or complicity. Such offence could never be
intended or could be a substantive offence. The
High Court Division held that no such offence of
abetment could be conceived of in respect of an
*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos.1658-59 of
2008.

(From the judgment and order dated the 28th day of
July, 2008 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition Nos.10744 of 2007 with WP No.8 of 2008 with WP
No.105 of 2008 with WP No.1777 of ‘08 with 1778 of 2008).

offence under section 26(2) or 27(1) of the ACC
Act, 2004, Accordingly, lodging of FIR, taking

cognizance, initiation of criminal proceedings

against the w

petitioners are unwar

unauthorized and without jurisdiction. (9)

Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate instructed hy Sufia
Khatun, Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner (in all

cases)

Mvi Md Wahidullah, Advocate-on-Record — For the

Respondents (in all cases).

Judgment

Md Fazlul Karim J : These Petitions for Leave
to Appeal are directed against the judgment and
order dated the 28th day of July, 2008 passed by the
High Court Division in Writ Petition No.8 of 2008
with WP No.1777 of 2008 and WP No.1778 of 2008
making the Rule absolute.

2. The facts involved in the case, in short, are
that the writ-petitioner is stated to be the wife of the
principal accused Md Tahmilur Rahman who was
former Managing Director of Sonali Bank. The writ-
petitioner is an individual Tax Payee having TIN
No.205-104-9194/C-88/Dhaka. The Commission
served an order dated 30-7-2007 upon Md Tahmilur
Rahman under section 26(1) of the ACC Act, 2004
asking him to submit statement of assets acquired in
his name or in the name of his wife or any other
dependent upon him, including source of income
within seven days of receipt thereof. Steps would be
taken against him under section 26(2) of the ACC
Act, 2004 if he failed to submit that statement of
assets or submit false statement. On 30-9-2007 hus-
band of the petitioner submitted statement of assets.
Then, on 11-11-2007 an FIR being Ramna PS Case
No.49/113 corresponding to ACC GR No.166 of
2007 was lodged against her husband and her for
illegal acquisition through corruption and conceal-
ment of information of assets of Taka 1,18,00,970.
After investigation, the police on 27-4-2008 submit-
ted charge sheet against both of them.


            
3. After receipt of the charge sheet, the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Dhaka transferred the ease
record to the Court of Metropolitan Senior Special
Judge, wherein the case was registered as Metro
Special Case No.S2 of 2008. The said Senior Special
Judge by his order dated 30-4-2008 took cognizance
of offences against the writ-petitioner and her hus-
band. Then, the case was renumbered as Special
Court Case No.03 of 2008. The said Special Judge
framed charges against the petitioner and her hus-
band. The last date of case was fixed on 23-7-2008.

4. In Writ Petition Nos.1777 of 2008 and
1778 of 2008. MAH Selim, son, wife and daughter
of the principal accused are petitioners. The son is a
Managing Director of a Company and individual
Tax Payee having TIN No.149-100-9464/Company
Circle-IV/Zone-II/Dhaka. The wife is also Director
of a Company and income Tax Payee having TIN
No.85-100-0652/Company —Circle-IV/Zone-II/
Dhaka and the daughter is married and Director of a
Company. She is also a regular Tax Payee having
TIN No.19-100-19611/C-IV/Zone-II/Dhaka. The
Commission served an order dated 29-5-2007 pur-
portedly under section 26(1) of the ACC Act, 2004
upon the said Principal accused MAH Selim, former
Member of Parliament from  Bagerhat-II
Constituency while he was in custody asking him to
submit statement of assets, moveable and immove-
able and assets liability, sources of income acquired
in his name or in the names of other dependents
upon him including wife, son or daughter within
seven days of receipt of thereon. Steps would be
taken against him if he failed to submit the said
statement of assets within the time fixed or submits.
false statement under section 26(2). In pursuance
thereof, MAH Selim submitted statement of assets
on 10-6-2007. The Commission on 6-12-2007
Jodged an FIR being Ramna PS Case No,29 dated 6-
12-2007 corresponding to ACC GR No.157 of 2007
against all of them for concealment of Taka
12,378,83,927.65. After investigation, the police
submitted charge sheet against all of them,

5. After receipt of the charge sheet, the case
record was sent to the Court of Metropolitan Senior
Special Judge at Dhaka where the case was renum-
bered as Metro Special CaseNo.79 of 2008. By an
order dated 10-6-2008 cognizance of offences under
section 26(2) and 27(1) of the ACC Act, 2004 reaq
with section 109 of the Penal Code were taken
against all of them. Then, the case record was trar
ferred to the 4th Court of Special Judge at Sher-c-
Bangla Nagar, Dhaka for trial. On 25-6-2008 the
case record was received and renumbered as Special
Case No.5 of 2008. The case is now pending for
charge to be framed.

6. The respondent No.2, Chairman of the
Commission, appeared but did not file any affidavit
in the writ petitions.

7. Mr Khurshid Alam  Khan. learned
Advocate, appearing for the petitioner submitted
that the High Court Division failed to conceive that
the writ petitions are maintainable as contemplated
in sections 4 and 5 of the Emergency Powers
Ordinance, 2007 debarring challenging of the Acts
of the delegated authority in any Court; that the
High Court Division erred in law interpreting sec-
tion 26(2) and 27(1) of the ACC Act, 2004 and Rule
15%(5) of the Emergency Powers Rules, 2007 read
with section 109 of the Penal Code and passed order
of stay of criminal proceedings out of misconcep-
tion of the law, The learned Advocate further sub-
mitted that the High Court Division has misdirected
itself and failed to appreciate that due satisfaction
contemplated in section 26(2) of the ACC Act, 2004
is only culminated through issue of the prescribed
order under Rule 27(1) in terms of Form-5 after
enquiry only, when investigation is that next step
which has been stayed by stay order, that the High
Court Division stayed operation of law itself viz the
ACC Act, 2004 and ACC Rules, 2007 read with
Emergency Powers Ordinance, 2007 and
Emergency Power Rules, 2007 which are nugatory
to achieve the object of curbing corruption. The
learned Advocate finally submitted that the High
Court Division has lost sight of the fact that the peti-
tioner has already complied with the order by
declaring the assets which on investigation has
shown prima facie ingredients of the offence tor
indictment of the petitioner and that on the
of violation of any mandatory procedural provision


            
the High Court Division stayed of proceedings
allowing the offenders to escape criminal justice
inasmuch as the notice in this case is the tool to-gother evidence on asset and it is in no way concerned with natural justice which shall be available to the petitioner in trial.

8. It appears from the record that the writ-
petitioners are individual tax payees under separate
tax identification number, No order was dimittedly
served upon any of them under section 26(1) of the
ACC 2004 asking any of them to submit state-
ment of assets, Moveable and immoveable acquired
illegally and/or disproportionate to known source of
income. Commission of an offence under section
26(2) is disclosed only when any person after
receipt of an order under section 26(1) would not
file statement of assets or submit false or fraudulent
statement of assets. In the commission of such
offence, there is no scope of any body to abet,
Similarly, offence under section 27(1) of the ACC
Act, 2004 is an aggravated form of the offence
under section 26(2) for acquisition of assets move-
able and immoveable in the name of person or oth-
ers dependents on him when he fails to explain such
acquisition. This person is definitely a person who
was asked under section 26(1) of the ACC Act, 2004
to submit statement of assets. In the absence of any
statement of assets there was no scope for him to
submit any explanation for acquisition of the assets.
No citizen could be arraigned for such a severe
offence in absence of service of any notice or order
for explaining the source of income. Offence of
abetment under section 109 is equally could not be
conceived of with regard to such an offence.

9. The High Court Division observed that
section 109 of the Penal Code is included in para-
graph 'Gha' of the schedule to the ACC Act, 2004 for
abetment to any offence under the schedule is com-
mitted by any sort of involvement or complicity.
Such offence could never be intended or could be a
substantive offence. The High Court Division held
that no such offence of abetment could be conceived
of in respect of an offence under section 26(2) or
27(1) of the ACC Act, 2004. Accordingly, lodging of
FIR, taking cognizance, initiation of criminal pro-

ceedings against the writ-petitioners are unwarrant-
ed, unauthorized and without jurisdiction,

10. In view of the above, we find no substance
in the submissions of the learned Advocate for the
petitioner,

Accordingly, the petitions are dismissed.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION

Md Fazlul Karim J
Md Joynul Abedin J
SAN Mominur
Rahman J
Judgment
July 23rd, 2009.

Anti-Corruption Commi-

ssion.... «+» Petitioner

vs

Nargis Begum & others.....
...Respondents*

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 27
Penal Code (XLV of 1860)
Section 109

In the absence of any statement of a
there was no scope to submit any explanation for
acquisition of assets there was no scope for him to
submit any explanation for acquisition of the
assets. No citizen could be arraigned for such a
severe offence in the absence of service of any
notice or order for explaining the source of
income. Offence of abetment under section 109
equally could not be conceived of with regard to
such an offence. (9)

Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate instructed by Sufia

etsy

Khatun, Advocate-on-Record—For the Petitioners (in
both the cases)

None Represented —For the respondents (in both the
cases)

*Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 1655 with 1657
of 2008.

(From the judgment and order dated the 28th day of
July, 2008 passed by the High Court Division in Writ
Petition Nos.10744 of 2007 with WP No.105 of 2008).

            
Judgment
Md Fazlul Karim J: These Petitions for Leave
to Appeal are directed against the judgment and
order dated 28-8-2008 passed by the High Court
Division in Writ Petition Nos.10744 of 2007 and
105 of 2008 making the Rules absolute.

2. The facts involved in the cases, in short, are
that in Writ Petition No.10744 of 2007 the petition-
ers are the wife and three children of the former
Minister Tariqul Islam, It is stated that the petition-
ers are doing business and paying income tax on the
basis of separate files, namely TIN:417-105-
3949/C-II/Jessore: TIN:424-106-5073/C-1/Jessore;
TIN:424-1014251/C-II/Jessore and TIN:424-112-
8679/C-1/Jessore respectively.

3. A notice dated 18-2-2007 under the signa-
ture of a Secretary of the Anti-Corruption
Commission, was served upon said Tariqul Islam
while he was in custody under rule 15Gha(1) and
15Gha(2) of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007 and
sections 18 and 26(1) of the Anti-Corruption
Commission Act, 2004 asking him to submit
through authorized representative statement of
assets owned and possessed in his name and the
names of the members of his family, including wife,
sons and daughters. In pursuance thereof, on 25-2-
2007 the statements of assets, movable and immoy-
able were submitted. On 9-9-2007 an FIR being
Kotwali Model PS Case No.24/216 corresponding
to ACC GR No.1 of 2007 was lodged against
Tariqul Islam and the petitioners for acquisition of
assets disproportionate to known source of his
income. Afier completion of the investigation, the
police submitted a charge sheet against all of them
for acquisition of assets disproportionate to known
source of income.

4. In Writ Petition No.105 of 2008, the peti-
tioner is the wife of the principal accused Redwan
Ahmed, former State Minister. The petitioner is stat-
ed to be a business lady and shareholder/Director of
various companies including Saleha Garments and
RR Brick Limited. She was also an individual tax
payer having TIN:036-100-2521/Company Circle/
Zone-II at Dhaka,

§. The Commission served an order dated 2.
7-2007 under section 26(1) of the ACC Act, 2004
upon her husband while he was in Jail asking him to
submit statement of assets, movable and immovab|.
acquired in his name or in the name of his wife o,
others dependent on him and also assets-liability
and sources of income within seven days of receipy
thereof. Otherwise steps would be taken against hin,
if he failed to submit any statement or submit false
statement under section 26(2) of the ACC Act, 2004
In pursuance thereof husband of the petitioner sub.
mitted statement of assets on 14-8-2007.

6. Thereafter, an FIR being Ramna PS Case
No.73/1157 dated 14-8-2007 corresponding to AC¢
GR No.172 of 2007 was lodged against her husband
and her for acquisition of assets of Taka
2,30,97,000. After investigation, the police submit.
ted a charge-sheet on 7-7-2008 against both the petitioner and her husband.

7. Respondent No.1, Chairman of the Com-
mission, appearing in the case filed an affidavit-in-
opposition stating that respondent No.3, an Assistant
Director of the Commission directed the Officer-in-
Charge of Ramna Police Station at Dhaka to lodge
an FIR against the husband and her under section
26(2) and 27(1) of the ACC Act, 2004 read with
Section 109 of Penal Code and rule 15Gha(5) of the
Emergency Powers Rules, 2007 for concealing ot
property in his statement.

8. Mr Khurshid Alam Khan, learned Advo-
cate, appearing for the petitioner submitted that the
High Court Division erred in interpreting sections
26(2) and 27(1) of the ACC Act, 2004 and Rule 15
Gha(5) of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007 and
passing an order of stay of criminal proceedings due
to misconception of law; that due satisfaction con-
templated in section 26(2) is only culminated
through issue of the prescribed order under rule
27(1) in terms of Form 5 after enquiry only, when
investigation is the next step which has been stayed
by stay order. The learned Advocate further submit-
ted that the High Court Division Stayed operation of
law itself viz the Act, 2004 and ACC Rules, 2007
read with Emergency Power Ordinance, 2007 and

            
Emergency Power Rules, 2007 which is nugatory to
achieve the object of curbing the corruption. The
learned Advocate also submitted that the High Court
Division lost sight of the fact that the petitioner has
already complied with the order by declaring the
assets Which on investigation has shown prima facie
ingredients of the offence for indictment of the peti-
sioner.

9. It appears from the record that the petition-
ers are individual tax-payers under separate tax
identification numbers. No order was admittedly
served upon any of them under section 26(1) of the
ACC Act, 2004 asking any of them to submit state-
ment of assets, movable and immovable acquired
illegally and/or disproportionate to known source of
income. Commission of an offence under section
26(2) is disclosed only when any person after
receipt of an order under section 26(1) would not
file statement of assets or submit false or fraudulent
statement of assets. In the commission of such
offence, there is no scope for anybody to abet.
Similarly, offence under section 27(1) of the ACC
Act, 2004 is an aggravated form of the offence
under section 26(2) for acquisition of assets mov-
able and immovable in the name of person or others
dependent on him when he fails to explain such
acquisition. This person is definitely a person who
was asked under section 26(1) of the ACC Act, 2004
to submit statement of assets. In the absence of any
statement of assets; there was no scope for him to
submit any explanation for acquisition of assets. No
citizen could be arraigned for such a severe offence
in the absence of service of any notice or order for
explaining the source of income. Offence of abet-
ment under section 109 equally could not be con-
ceived of with regard to such an offence.

10. In view of the above, we find no substance
in the submissions of the learned Advocate for the
petitioner.

Accordingly, the petitions are dismissed.

Ed,

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)

MM Ruhul Amin CJ. | Alam Uddin alias Shapan,.

Md Fazlul Karim J] woe. aan Petitioner
Md Tafazzul Islam J
Md Joynul Abedin J vs
Judgment
March 3rd, 2009, ' State.........04 Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (v of 189%)
Section 374

The death of the victim was due to asphyxia
resulting from exerting pressure on the throat,
neck, head and facial region, which was ante-
mortem and homicidal in nature and it ex-facie
clear that the petitioner strangled the victim with
the intention of causing her death and there is no
circumstances that may impel the Court to take a
lenient view in commuting the death sentence as
there is no mitigating or extenuating circum-
‘stances on record for the purpose of commuta-
tion of the death sentence, rather all the circum-

stances  aggravating..............................(5)

Md Helaluddin’ Mollah, Advocate—For the

Petitioner.

SM Abdul Mobin, Deputy Attorney-General—For the
Respondent.

Judgment
Md Tafazzul Islam J : This jail petition seeking
leave to appeal is directed agianst the judgment and
order dated 22-11-2005 of the High Court Division
passed in Death Reference No.112 of 2003 accept-
ing the same.

2. The prosecution case, in short, is that
Khodeja Bibi alias Komola, the victim, was given
marriage to the petitioner who, after the marriage,

* Jail Petition No. 19 of 2007.

(From the judgment and order dated 22-11-2005
passed by the High Court Division in Death Reference
No.112 of 2003).

            
stated maltreating her for money and as a result the
relationship between them beeame strained and on
the night following 1-12-1997 at about 12-30 O'
clock, Saaduddin, the father the father of the peti-
tioner and one Shajal came to the house of the PW
2, the father of the victim, and told him that the con-
dition of the victim was critical and then PW 2
rushed to the house of Saaduddin and found the vic-
tim dead and though PW 1 was finger marks on the
throat of the victim but it was given out that the vic-
tim had committed suicide by taking poison and so
PW 2 lodged Unnatural Death Case No.13 of 1997;
after holding the inquest on the dead body of the vic-
tim, the same was sent to the hospital for autopsy
where autopsy was held but opinion on autopsy was
withheld pending receipt of the viscera examination
reprot; then viscera examination reprot was received
with the opinion that no poison was detected and the
Medical Board opined that the death of the victim
was due to asphyxia resulting from exerting pres-
sure on the throat, neck, head and facial region of
the victim which was ante-mortem and homicidal in
nature. The police, after investigation, submitted-
charge sheet against the petitioner under section 302
of the Penal Code. At the commencement of the trial
of the case, the petitioner was charged under section
302 of the Penal Code but the same could not be
read over and explained to him because of his
abscondence and for the abscondence of the peti-
tioner ultimately the trial case had to be concluded
in absentia. The defence plea, as it appears from the
trend of cross-examination of the prosecution wit-
nesses, is that the victim committed suicide by tak-
ing poison in the house of the petitioner and the peti-
tioner is not responsible for her death and the had
been falsely implicated in the case out of oblique
motive. After conclusion of the trial, the learned
Sessions Judge Moulvibazar, by judgment and order
dated 20-9-2003 convicted the petitioner under sec-
tion 302 of the Penal Code and sentenced him to
death and then made the reference to the High Court
Division under section 374 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. The High Court Division, after hearing,
accepted the reference upholding the sentence of
death.

3. The learned counsel for the petitioner sub.
mits that the prosecution failed to prove that the
death was due to demand of dowry and the | eh
Court Division without any discussion on this point
upheld the death sentence and further the High);
Court Division, without considering that the Doctor
who conducted chemical examination, is the most 
important and vital witness of this case but he ha,
not been examined; further the police, who took the
death body to the hospital, has also not been exam-
ined which creates serious doubt on the prosecution,
case regarding the identification of dead body of the
victim; moreover the petitioner was also not duly
examined under section 342 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure which is a mandatory provision; moreover
it is also evident form the record (postmortem report)
that the age of the victim was 20 years and so the age
of the condemned prisoner may be similar or a bit
more and accordingly considering the tender age of
the petitioner, the sentence of death may be commuted to sentence of imprisonment for life.

4. As it appears the High Court Division
accepted the death reference holding that admitied-
ly on the night following 1-12-1997 the victim lives
with the petitioner in his house and the dead body
was found there and the evidence on record does not
show that the petitioner took any step for the treat-
ment of the victim at the material time when her
condition was critical and further the unexplained
and continuous abscondence of the petitioner after
the occurrence is a relevant fact under section § of
the Evidence Act which is indicative of his 'mens
rea’ in the commission of the offence and there is
also no evidence or suggestion or circumstances to
show that the other inmates, if any, of the house of
the petitioner assaulted her to death and further the
petitioner did not bring the matter of the unnatural
death of the victim to the notice of the police and
moreover the evidence on record does not indicate
that the petitioner attended the funeral rites of the
victim; further as per viscera examination reprol-
Exhibit 2, no poison was detected in the viscera o!
the victim and the opinion of the Medical Board is
that the death of the victim was due to asphyxia


            
resulting from exerting pressure on the throat, neck,
head and facial region which was ante-mortem and
homicidal in nature and further the motive of killing
of the victim-wife by the husband/petitioner has
been firmly established and on the other hand the
defence ve ¢ has been found to be a
blatant f ; Moreover all the incriminating
circumstance: ove are undoubtedly inconsis-
tent with the innocence of the petitioner and the
chain of the circumstantial evidence is well-knit,
complete and unbroken and there is no missing link
in the chain of the circumstances appearing agianst
the petitioner and a; ackdrop, no other
hypothesis excepting that of the guilt of the peti-
tioner is possible.

5. Regarding the submission of the learned
counsel of the petitioner that in view of the tender
age of the petitioner the sentence of death imposed
upon him may be commuted to imprisonment for
life, as it appears similar submission was made
before the High Court Division but the same was not
accepted as the High Court Division found that the
death of the victim was due to asphyxia resulting
from exerting pressure on the throat, neck, head and
facial region, which was ante-mortem and homici-
dal in nature and it is ex-facie clear that the peti-
tioner strangled the victim with the intention of
causing her death and there is no circumstances that
may impel the Court to take a lenient view in com-
muting the death sentence as there is no mitigating
or extenuating circumstances on record for the pur-
pose of commutation of the death sentence, rather
all the circumstances are aggravating.

6. We accept the above view of the High
Court Division as it is a settled principle of law that
the object of sentence should be to see that crime
does not go unpunished and the society has the sat-
isfaction that justice has been done and it will be a
mockery of justice to permit the offender to escape
the extreme penalty of law when faced with cruel act
perpetrated by him and moreover to give lesser pun-
ishment to the offender who stood convicted in a
shocking and revolting crime would render the
Justice System of the country in question and to

award inadequate sentence under sympathy would
do harm to Justice System and would undermine
pubic confidence in the efficacy of law.

7. Accordingly there is no illegality or intir-
mity in the above decision of the High Court
Division so as to call for any interference.

The petition is dismissed.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION

(Criminal)
Md Ruhul Amin J | State.............2.008 Appellant
MM Ruhul Amin J \s
Md Tafazzul Islam J
Judgment Lailun Nahar Ekram.........
January 17th, 2007. Respondent*

Code of Criminal Procedure (v of 189s)
Section 561A

No prima facie case was made out against the
respondent in the first information report and
the District Anti-Corruption Officer, Gazipur
without examining the necessary papers of the
authority (IPSA) specially bill No.4 dated 29-10-
1994 lodged the first information report.

During investigation by police usually the
Court does not interfere under section 561A of
the Code but in the instant case is a fit case to
interfere at the stage of police investigation to
prevent the abuse of the process of the court and
tosecuretheends ofjustice. ow... (11, 12)

Abdur Rezaque Khan, Additional Attorney
instructed by ASM Khalequzzaman, Advocate-on-Record
—For the Appellant,

General

Khandkar Mahbub Hossain,
instructed by Md Afiab Hossain, Advocate-on-Record—
For the Respondent,

Senior Advocate.

*Criminal Appeal No.46 of 2000.

            
 Judgment

MM Ruhul Amin J: This appeal by leave is
directed against the judgment and order dated 3-6-
1999 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court
Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.821 of
1995 quashing the proceeding of Joydebpur PS Case
No.34/610 dated 31-12-1994 under sections
409/109 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of
Act Il of 1947,

2. Short facts are that one Md Golam
Mostafa, District Anti-Corruption Officer, Gazipur
lodged first information report with Joydebpur
Police Station alleging, inter alia, that accused Latif
Newaz Waliur Rahman, Executive Engineer,
Institute of Post Graduate Studies in Agriculture,
(shortly IPSA), Gazipur and Mrs Lailun Nahar
Ekram, the respondent in collusion with each other
for illegal gain misappropriated Taka 11,80,615 by
false billing against consultancy service and thereby
committed an offence punishable under section
409/109 of the Penal Code read with section 5(2) of
Act II of 1947. During investigation of the case by
the Bureau of Anti-Corruption respondent moved
the High Court Division under section 561A of the
Code of Criminal Procedure praying for quashing
the proceeding and the High Court Division by the
impugned judgment and order made the Rule
absolute.

3. Leave was granted to consider the submis-
sion that when a very strong prima facie case was
made out in the first information report as to an
offence punishable under sections 409/109 of the
Penal Code read with section 5(2) of Act II of 1947
and the case was under investigation and the inves-
tigating officer was collecting materials, the High
Court Division was not justified in quashing the
entire proceeding and as such the same is illegal and
the submission that the consistent decisions of the
Appellate Division of the Supreme Court is against
the quashment of any proceeding during investiga-
tion by the police but by ignoring the consistent
view of the Appellate Division, the High Court
Division most illegally quashed the proceeding at
the stage of investigation.

4, We have heard Mr Abdur Rezaque Khan,
the learned Additional Attorney-General for the
appellant and Mr Khandaker Mahbub Hossain, the
learned Counsel for the respondent and perused the
judgment of the High Court Division and other con.
nected papers.

5. The admitted facts are that he respondent,
as Managing Director of Engineers and Consultants
(Bangladesh) Ltd (ECBL) got the work of consul.
tancy services for the project of construction of sey.
eral buildings of the Institute of Post Graduate
Studies in Agriculture, (IPSA) at Gazipur ECBL
was doing the said consultancy works under an
agreement dated 14-12-1993 with IPSA,
Accordingly the ECBLS' estimated entitlements
were Taka 26,97,570 for designing and tendering
works, topographic survey and soil test,
Subsequently IPSA by its letter dated 22-2-1994
requested ECBL to include on survey a link road
connecting IPSA with Shipultali-Salna Road in the
master plan.

6. The allegations against the respondent is
that the respondent took the money for fifty one
bore holes relating to topographic survey by bill
Nos.1 and 2 respectively dated 11-3-1994 and 19-5.
1994 and she took the same amount of money for
the same work by bill No.3 dated 30-6-1994,

7. ‘It appears from bill No.4 dated October
29,1994 submitted by the respondent that in run
bill No.3 inadvertently they billed against sub-soil
investigation which were already included in Design
and Tendering phase bill and they regretted very
much for the mistake and in bill No.4 necessary cor-
rections were accordingly made. It was further men-
tioned in bill No.4 that if any amount against sub-
soil investigation was paid separately, the same may
be adjusted in bill No.4.

8. The first information report was lodged on
31-12-1994 that is long after the submission of bill
No.4 dated 29-10-1994 stating the inadvertent mis-
take in bill No.3 and further requesting the authori-
ty to adjust from bill No. 4 and excess amount
drawn in bill No.3

            
9. The learned Counsel for the respondent
submits that bill Nos.1-3 are all running bills and in
pill No.4, the respondent clearly stated that inadver-
tently sub-soil testing was included in bill No.3 and
regretted for the inadvertence and further requested
the authority to adjust the amount from bill No.4,
The learned Counsel further submits that after com-
pletion of entire work of the project when the final
pill would be submitted, the authority (IPSA) would
be at liberty to adjust/deduct any excess amount if
paid to the respondent in making payment against
munning bills.

10. In the above facts and circumstances of the
case, the leamed Additional Attorney General found
it difficult to support the lodging of first information
report against the respondent.

11. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances
of the case and in light of the discussions made
above, we are of the view that no prima facie case
was made out against the respondent in the first
information report and the District Anti-Corruption
Officer, Gazipur without examining the necessary
papers of the authority (IPSA) specially bill No.4
dated 29-10-1994 lodged the first information report
on 31-12-1994.

12. We are mindful of the fact that during
investigation by police usually the Court does not
interfere under section 561A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, but in the present case, in view
of the facts and circumstances as noticed above, we
consider it a fit case to interfere at the stage of police
investigation to prevent the abuse of the process of
the Court and to secure the ends of justice.

13. Therefore, in our view, the High Court
Division upon correct assessment of the materials
on record has arrived at a correct decision and as
such there is no cogent reason to interfere with the
judgment of the said Division.

The appeal is dismissed.

Ed.

APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)
Md Fazlul Karim J | Malek Hu
Mad Joynul Abedin J
ABM Khairul

Haque J
Judgment

August 12th, 2009.

‘ain Pir...

Begum Nurjahan Khanum
and others

Criminal Law Amendment Act (XL. of 195%)
Section 6(5)

According to of section 6(5) of the Act the
Government is to accord sanction within 60 days
of the memo seeking sanction and after the lapse
of 60 days it shall be deemed that sanction was
duly accorded and accordingly, to proceed with
the trial of the case. But in the instant case, after
the expiry of 60 days period, the Government has
decided not to accord sanction intimating that
the Government has decided not to accord any
sanction in order to proceed with the case; In
view of the provision of section 6(5) of the Act
meanwhile for failure of the authority to intimate
within 60 days of the letter seeking for sanction it
will be deemed that sanction was duly accorded
after the expiry of the period of 60 days when the
sanction was sought for and in view of the provi-
sion of law any subsequent letter refusing to
accord sanction was of no legal consequence.

This determining clause shall prevail in
respect of the proceeding with the trial of the case
and that the subsequent letter of the Government
replying to the letter refusing to accord sanction
was of no legal consequence and consequently,
the proceeding shall continue in accordance with
law as if the sanction to prosecute has been

obtained against the accused and the subsequent

*Criminal Appeal No.11 of 2004.

(From the judgment and order dated the 2nd day of
August, 2002 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal
Revision No.218 of 2002).

            
refusing to accord sanction and consequently not
to proceed with the case against the accused was
of no legal consequence.

Mansur Habib, Advocate instructed by Md Nawab

Ali, Advocate-on-Record—For the Appellant.

TH Khan, Senior Advocate instructed by Md Aftab
Hossain, Advocate-on-Record—For Respondent Nos.2-3,

None Represented—For the Respondent Nos.1 and 4-7.

Judgment

Md Fazlul Karim J : This Appeal by leave is
directed against the judgment and order dated the
2nd day of August, 2002 passed by the High Court
Division in Criminal Revision No.218 of 2002 dis-
charging the Rule.

2. The prosecution case, in short, is that the
appellant as complainant filed a petition of com-
plaint against the accused-persons alleging, inter
alia, that they committed an offence of forgery,
interpolation, wrongful gain and criminal miscon-
duct. The learned Senior Special Judge, Sunamganj
on receipt of the petition of complaint examined the
complainant under section 200 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and registered the case as
Special Case No.13 of 2001 and passed an order
writing to the Government for sanction as out of 10
accused 6 were public servants fixing 25-11-2001
for further order. On 25-11-2001 the District Anti-
Corruption Bureau, Sunamganj filed an application
praying for time for submitting the order of sanction
and the case was accordingly fixed on 15-1-2002 for
receipt of the order of sanction, if any. On 10-1-2002
an application was filed by the complainant peti-
tioner stating, infer alia, that since 60 days already
expired from the date of writing to the authority for
sanction but the sanction had not yet been received,
proceeding should be started against the public ser-
vants also as after the expiry of 60 days it will be
deemed that the sanction was duly accorded. The
learned Senior Special Judge fixed the application
for hearing on the date already fixed earlier i.e. 15-
1-2002. On 15-1-2002 a letter dated 15-1-2002 was
received from the Prime Minister's Office through

Fax of the Office of Deputy Commissioner intimat.
ing that sanction for prosecution of the public ser.
vants was not accorded. The Senior Special Judge
accordingly refused to take cognizance against the
public servants as sanction was refused. Being
aggrieved the complainant moved the High Cour
Division and obtained the Rule but the Rule was dis.
charged by the High Court Division.

3. Leave was granted to consider the submis-
sions of the learned Advocate for the appellant that
"the record shows from the date of writing to the
Government for according sanction to take cog.
nizance against the accused who were public ser.
vants, 60 days expired and accordingly as per provi-
sions of section 6(5) of the Criminal Lay
Amendment Act, 1958 it will be deemed that sane-
tion was duly accorded but the learned Senior
Special Judge did not follow the mandatory provi-
sions of law and accordingly, refused to take cog.
nizance against the public servants. He further sub-
mitted that sub-section 5 of section 6 of the Criminal
Law Amendment Act, 1958 provides that where the
complaint is not accompanied by such sanction, the
Special Judge shall, immediately on receipt of the
complaint or report, address, by letter, the
Government in the matter, and if the required sanc-
tion is neither received nor refused within six
of the receipt of the letter by the Government, such
sanction shall be deemed to have duly accorded. He
finally submitted that the High Court Division com-
mitted an error of law in holding that the learned
Special Judge did not commit any illegality in not
taking cognizance against the accused public ser-
vant after the expiry of 60 days from the writing to
the Government for sanction of prosecution."

4. Mr Mansur Habib, learned Advocate,
appearing for the petitioner submitted that the High
Court Division failed to consider that the trial Court
directed to issue letter for sanction for prosecution of
the accused public servants and the sanction was not
accorded by the Government within the period of 60)
days of the Order No.1 dated 12-9-2001 of the trial
Court, the trial Court is entrusted to proceed with the
case under section 6(5) of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1958 considering that sanction was

            
deemed to have been obtained to prosecute the accused public servants, The leamed Advocate further submitted that the order sheet of the proceeding showed that the Court directed to accord sanction on 12-9-2001 and the Government did not accord sanction to prosecute against the accused public servant within 60 days and after lapse of 60 days the trial Court had the jurisdiction to proceed with the case in holding that the Govemment failed to send sanction to prosecute the accused public servants within 60 days and after lapse of 60 days of the period sought for sanction the same
nave been deemed to have been asserted and the trial Court could have proceeded in holding that the sanction was obtained after lapse of 60 days.

Mr TH Khan, learned Counsel, appearing for
the respondent Nos.2-3 submitted that the High
Court Division held rightly that the respondents
could not be prosecuted without sanction of the
Government and in this case, Government did not
give sanction for prosecution and accordingly, the
High Court Division have held that the complainant
Jodged the complaint against the respondents
describing them as public servants and offences
alleged against them are under sections 166/168/
467/468/477 and 420 of the Penal Code and under
section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,

1974. The case is triable under the provisions of

Criminal Law Amendment Act and under section
6(5) of the said Act sanction of the Government is
required for the prosecution of public servants for an
offence mentioned in the schedule of the act. As the
Government refused to accord sanction to prosecute
the aforesaid respondents, the learned Judges of the
High Court Division discharged the Rule. The
learned Counsel finally submitted that the High
Court Division dismissed the judgment of the
leamed Senior Special Judge found that the hearing
dated of the Special Case No.13 of 2001 was fixed
on 15-1-2002 and on that date order of the
Government refusing to accord sanction was
received and as such, the High Court Division find-
ing no illegality in the judgment of the learned
Senior Special Judge discharged the Rule.

6. The trial Court while ordering to register
the case being Special Case No.13 of 2001 directed

to write for according sanction required for prosecu-
tion under section 6(5) of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1958 by his order dated 12-9-2001
and fixed 25-11-2001 as next date. According to the
provision of section 6(5) of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1958 the Government is to accord
sanction within 60 days of the said memo seeking
sanction and after the lapse of 60 days it shall be
deemed that sanction was duly accorded and accord-
ingly, to proceed with the trial of the case. But in the
instant case, afler such event has occurred in accor-
dance with law, i.e. after the expiry of 60 days peri-
od, the Government has decided not to accord sane-
tion by its letter dated 15-1-2002 intimating that the
Government has decided not to accord any sanction
in order to proceed with the case. But in view of the
provision of section 6(5) of the act of 1958 mean-
while for failure of the authority to intimate within
60 days of the letter seeking for sanction it will be
deemed that sanction was duly accorded after the
expiry of the period of 60 days when the sanction
was sought for and in view of the said provision of
law any subsequent letter refusing to accord sanc-
tion was of no legal consequence.

7. This determining clause shall prevail in
respect of the proceeding with the trial of the case and
that the subsequent letter of the Government replying
to the letter refusing to accord sanction was of no legal
consequence and consequently, the proceeding shall
continue in accordance with law as if the sanction to
prosecute has been obtained against the accused and
the subsequent letter refusing to accord sanction and
consequently not to proceed with the case against the
accused was of no legal consequence.

8. Accordingly, the appeal must succeed.

The judgment and order of the High Court
Division dated the 2nd day of August, 2002 passed
by the High Court Division in Criminal Revision
No.218 of 2002 is set aside and Special Case No.13
of 2001 in the Court of Sessions Special Ju
Sunamganj shall proceed against the accused in
accordance with law,

In the result, the appeal is allowed.

Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)
MM Ruhul Amin CJ}
Md Joynul Abedin J
Md Abdul Matin J
SAN Mominur Rahman J vs
ABM khairal Haque J

Amzad_ Hossain *
Vapeeenanevonoatel Petitioner

Judgment
November 16th, 2009

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972
Article 111

Binding effect of Supreme Court judg-
ments—A judgment of the High Court Division
cannot be frustrated by any executive order, The
order for transfer of the case to the Druto Bichar
Tribunal has been made by an executive order.
Any judgment passed by the High Court Division
is binding on all as per our Constitution and the
subordinate courts are duty bound to comply
with such judgment.

Abdul Kader Mirza vs Bangladesh, 60 DLR (AD)
185 ref.

AKM Shafiqul Alam, Advocate, instructed by Syed
Mahbubar Rahman, Advocate—on-Record- For the
Petitioner.

Khurshid Alam Khan, Advocate, instructed by Syed
M Rahman, Advocate-on-Record—For the Respondent
No.2,

Not Represented—Respondent No.1.

Judgment

SAN Mominur Rahman J ; Instant leave petition
under Article 103 of the Constitution is for leave to
appeal agianst the judgment and order dated 3-3-

*Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No.159 of
2009.

(From the judgment and order dated 3-3-2009 passed
by the High Court Division in Criminal Miscellaneous Case
No.5373 of 2009).

2009 passed by the High Court Division in Criminal
Miscellaneous Case No.5373 of 2008 discharging
the rule.

2. Relevant facts are that the accused pet.
tioner was facing trial in Sessions Case No.2280 of
2007 arising out of Uttara Police Station Case No.4
dated 28-8-2006 under sections 302/34 of the Pena}
Code corresponding to GR No.375 of 2006. The
case was pending before the Metropolitan Sessions
Judge, Dhaka, and that on an application filed under
Section 526 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
before the High Court Division, registered as
Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.15466 of 2007, the
High Court Division was pleased to transfer the case
to the Ist Court of Metropolitan Additional Sessions
Judge, Dhaka, for trial but in the meantime the
Ministry of Home Affairs by gazette notification
transferred the case to Druto Bichar Tribunal No.3,
Dhaka, for disposal of the case. Accordingly the
Metropolitan Sessions Judge transferred the case tot
he said Tribunal No.3 but on receipt of the order of
the High Court Division transferring the case to the
Court of Metropolitan Additional Sessions Judge.
Ist Court, Dhaka, said Tribunal No.3 transferred the
case record to the said Metropolitan Additional
Sessions Judge, Ist Court, Dhaka, and accordingly
on receipt of the record the Metropolitan Additional
Sessions Judge framed charge on 21-1-2008 and
fixed date for evidence and thereafter on 2-4-2008
the Additional Public Prosecutor filed an application
before the Metropolitan Additional Sessions Judge
to transfer the case to Druto Bichar Tribunal No.2.
Dhaka, pursuant to a gazette notification issued by
the Ministry of Home Affairs and accordingly the
case has been transferred to the Druto Bichar
Tribunal No.2; where the case has been registered as
Druto Bichar Tribunal Case No.7 of 2008.

3. It appears from the impugned order passed
by the High Court Division dated 3-3-2009 that the
Rule was issued calling upon the opposite party to
show cause as to why the order dated 10-4-2008
passed by the Druto Bichar Tribunal Nos.2, Dhaka,
in Druto Bichar Tribunal Case No.7 of 2008 should
not be quashed.

            
4. On perusal of the application filed under
section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
registered as Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.5373
of 2008, we do not find any nexus in between the
prayer made in the application under section 561A
of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the subject
matter ie. the Rule decided by the impugned judg-
ment and order, In the application the petitioner
prayed for quashing the proceedings of the
Metropolitan Sessions Case No.2280 of 2007 pend-
ing in the Court of Metropolitan Additional Sessions
Judge, Ist Court, Dhaka, whereas the impugned
judgment and order relates to the order dated 10-4-
2008 passed by the Druto Bichar Tribunal No.2,
Dhaka in Druto Bichar Tribunal Case No.7 of 2008
allowing transfer of the case to the Druto Bichar
Tribunal from the Court of Metropolitan Additional
Sessions Judge despite the judgment and order
passed by the High Court Division in Criminal
Miscellaneous case No:15466 of 2007 directing the
trial of the case by the Metropolitan Additional
Sessions Judge.

5. It appears that the High Court Division
relying on a decision of the High Court Division in
the case of Abdul Kader Mirza vs Bangladesh,
reported in 60 DLR (AD) 185, held that the provi-
sions of sections 5 and 6 of the Druto Bichar
Tribunal Ain authorizes the Government to transfer
the case to a Tribunal for expeditious disposal and
such transfer is not hit by the principle of equality
before law or equal protection before the law inas-
much as the same is applicable to the trial of offence
or classes of offence without discrimination and that
the High Court Division in such premise cannot
allow any argument challenging the legality and
propriety of the government in transferring the case
in reference to the Druto Lichar Tribunal.

6. The High Court Division as it appears has
failed to consider that the order dated 10-4-2008 of
the Tribunal considered by the High Court Division
is not entertainable under section 561A of the Code
of Criminal Procedure and hence the rule, as quoted
in the impugned judgment of the High Court
Division, ought not to have been issued.

7. However the High Court Division as it
appears, has missed the fact 
transferred to the Metropolitan Additios
Judge for disposal in compliance to a judgment and
order passed by the High Court Division, which fact
is absent in the case reported in 60 DLR (AD) 185,
and hence said decision is not applicable in the
instant case. A judgment of the High Court Division
cannot be frustrated by any executive order. The
order for transfer of the case to the Druto Bichar
Tribunal has been made by an executive order. Any
judgment passed by the High Court Division is
binding on all as per our Constitution and the subor-
dinate courts are duty bound to comply with such
judgment.

8. It appears that the application under section
561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as framed
and filed, and the rule as issued, on which the
impugned judgment and order of the High Court
Division has been passed discharging the rule. do
not have any nexus with each other. The rule as
issued and decided upon the application filed under
section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure is
misconceived and same is not maintainable under
section 561A of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

9. In view of our observations made herein-
above the impugned judgment and order of the High
Court Division is not sustainable and hence set
aside. But having regard to the facts and circum-
stances of the case, the rule issued in respect of the
order dated 10-4-2008 passed by the Druto Bichar
Tribunal No.2, Dhaka, is discharged, since not
amendable under section 561A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and the order of transfer of the
said case of the Metropolitan Additional Sessions
Judge for disposal shall remain unaffected.

Accordingly the leave petition is dismissed.

Ed.

            
APPELLATE DIVISION
(Criminal)

Md Fazlul Karim CJ
Md Abdul Matin J
SAN Mominur Rahman J
ABM Khairal Haque J

Anti-Corruption Com-
mission .

Petitioner

Md Muzammel Hossain J e
Surendra Kumar Sinha J | Dr Mohiuddin Khan
Judgment Alamgir and others......
July 4th, 2010. ...Respondents*

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 32

No sanction is required to file a complaint
(sfécat) and the unamended as well as the
amended section 32 requires only one sanction
from the Commission.

The High Court Division, however, misinterpreted
section 32 of the Act, the original as well as the amended
one, in holding that a sanction by the Commission is
required before lodging an first information report. The
High Court Division, further misconceived the amended
section 32 and wrongly held that a further sanction is
required to take cognizance of the offence by the Court
inspite of the sanction given earlier under sub-section (2)
of section 32 of the Act. sesee( 15)

Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007
Rules3 & 4

Code of Criminal Procedure (Vv of 1898)
Section 154

Words ‘ara ‘icwa" means institution of a
case by submission of a charge sheet by an officer
of the Commission, before the concerned Court
and certainly not an first information report as
envisaged under section 154 of the Code of
fiminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No.398 of
2009.

(Fron the Judgment and order dated 13-7-2009
passed by the High Court Division in Criminal Appeal
No.4393 of 2007). The High Court Division Judgment
reported in 15 BLC 107.

Criminal Procedure or a complaint (@f8en") as
envisaged under Rule 3 and 4 of the Rules,

The istible conclusion is that no sanction
will be required to file a complaint (aeons)
either with the Commission or with the police,
But sanction from the Commission shall be
required both under the unamended and the
amended section 32, before institution of a case
(APPT HICHCHA CGR) in the concerned Court.

26)

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2003)
Section 32

Sanction from the Commission will be
required when the charge sheet is filed under
sub-section (2) and on receipt of the charge sheet
along with a copy of the letter of sanction the
Court takes cognizance of the offence for trial,
either under the original section 32 or the amend-
ed section 32. As a matter of fact, only one sanc-
tion will be required under section 32, unamend-
ed or amended.

— (27)

Section 32

After completion of the investigation, the
investigating officer, under sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 32, on obtaining the sanction from the
Commission, would submit the police report
before the Court along with a copy of the letter of
sanction, The Court, under sub-section (1),
would take cognizance, only when there is such
sanction from the Commission. Both the sub-sec-
tion (1) and sub-section (2) of the section 32
envisages only one sanction, not two. Sub-section
(1) does not spell out or even envisage filing of
any fresh sanction when the sanction to prosecute

has already been filed along with the charge sheet
of the investigating officer. It only envisages that

            
without such sanction from the Commission
(ofeicns Sea BSeaty) as spelt out in sub-
section (2), no Court shall take cognizance of the
offence (IR STARTS QR weera Gy cowry Geray,
Apia! ST aiae WATT Ht) under sub-section (1)
(29)

of section 32,

Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007
Rules 3 & 4

An officer of the Commission lodged a first
information report on 6-3-2007 with the Tejgaon
Police Station and a case was started. This is not
envisaged under rules 3 and 4 of the Rules. Those
Rules provide only for filing of the complaint
involving the offences mentioned in the schedule
to the Act. However, those provions are merely
directory and deviation from provisions in lodg-
ing an first information report instead of a com-
plaint, would not vitiate the proceedings (31)

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 32(1)(2)

The requirement of sub-section (1) of section
32 was complied with when the charge sheet was
filed along with a copy of the sanction from the
Commission. As such, there was no illegality in
taking cognizance by the learned Judge of the
Metropolitan Senior Special Judge. (34)

Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007
Rules3 & 4
Commissioners resigned from the Commis-
sion on 7-2-2007 and it was reconstituted on 24-
2-2007, as such, although the Commission existed
as an Institution on 18-2-2007, when the notice
was issued, but there was no Commission within
the meaning of section 3 read with section 5 of the
Act on that date.

Anti-Corruption Comm
Section 26
Satisfaction—Satisfaction must be of the

Commission itself constituted of no other person

fon Act (Vv of 2004)

ssioners. The relevant order to

than its Comm
submit assets may be is
rised officials but the decision to issue such an
order must be recorded by the Commissioner(s).

serene 40)

ued by any of its autho-

Section 26

If any person acts beyond his authority, to
the prejudice of any person, such acts cannot be
ratified or validated by post facto legislation, his
action remains void.

Sections 18 & 26

Section 26 envisages that before issuance of
the notice, the Commissioner(s) must be satisfied
about the allegation. It is their satisfaction and of
nobody elses. But by sub-section (2) of section 18,
the Commissioners can only ratify the 'satisfac-
tion' of the Secretary which is certainly not stip-

ulated in section 26,000 seees (42)

Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)
Section 26

Notice—A notice must allow a reasonable
time to check-up the details of the assets of a per-
son, if necessary, on examination of his records
and after consultation with his lawyers and other
concerned persons. Section 26 certainly does not
envisage a notice upon a person who is in deten-
tion and he is not expected to give any details of
his assets within the time specified. The person
concerned must be afforded a fair and reason-
able opportunity to respond to the notice, other-
wise, it is no notice in the eye of law. A notice
issued under section 26 of the Act to a detenu.

            
away from his hearth and home, cannot be said



to be a fair and bonafide exercise of power, ...(44)



Anti-Corruption Commission Act (V of 2004)

Section 26(2)



No legal impediment for the Commission to

issue fresh notice under section 26 of the Act, if so

advised, but not in those cases where the accused

has already been acquitted on merit of the case as

is in this (46)



Ma4 Aziz Khan, Advocate, (Khurshid Alam Khan,



ate with him), instructed by Mahmuda Begum,



Advocate-on-Record — For the Petitioner.



Rafique-ul-Huque, Senior Advocate (Ahsanul Karim,

Advocate with him) instructed by Mvi Md Wahidullah,



Advocate-on-Record — For the Respondent No.1.



Not represented — Respondent No.2.



Judgment



ABM Khairul Haque J : This is a petition for

leave to appeal, filed on behalf of the Anti-

Corruption Commission, against the Judgment and

Order dated 13-7-2009, passed by the High Court

Division in Criminal Appeal No.4393 of 2007,

allowing the appeal and setting aside the Judgment

and Order passed by the Special Judge, Court No.3,

Dhaka, in Special Case No.1 of 2007, in convicting

and sentencing the respondent No.1, Dr Mohiuddin

Khan Alamgir.



2. The facts leading to the filing of this peti-

tion are that the Secretary of the Anti-Corruption

Commission (in short the 'Commission') issued a

notice on 18-2-2007 under section 26(1) of qrifs

WAR fei GIZA, 2008 (V of 2004) (the 'Act’) upon

the respondent No.1, while he was under detention,

asking him to submit a statement of his assets and

liabilities. On receipt of the said notice, he filed his

statement on 20-2-2007, and subsequently, he filed



another supplementary statement on 24-4-2007, Oy

6-3-2007, a first information report was lodged

against the respondent No.1, narrating various alle.

gations of acquiring movable and immovable prop.

ertics by abuse of power, and a case was recorded

under sections 26 and 27 of the Act, section 409 of

the Penal Code, section 5(2) of Act II of 1947 and

rules 15, 15Ka, 1SKha, 15Gha(5) of the Emergency

Powers Rules, 2007. After investigation, charge.

sheet No.189 was submitted on 29-4-2007 before

the Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, with

due sanction from the Commission. The learned

Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, took cognizance of the

offence and sent the case to the Third Court of

Special Judge, for trial. A supplementary charge-

sheet was also submitted on 21-5-2007 against the

respondent No.1, bringing the allegation of conceal-

ment of total Taka 3,27,88,465 which he allegedly

acquired beyond his known legal source of income

and the learned Special Judge framed Charge under

sections 26(2) and 27(1) of the Act read with rule

15Gha(5) of the Emergency Power Rules, 2007.



3. The learned Special Judge, on examination

of witnesses and other evidence on record, found the

respondent No.1 guilty of the charges of concealing

various amounts and possessing those beyond his

known source of income and on those findings, by

his Judgment and Order dated 26-7-2007, convicted

and sentenced him to suffer simple imprisonment

for 3 years under section 26(2) of the Act read with

tule SGha(5) of the Emergency Powers Rules, 2007

and rigorous imprisonment for 10(ten) years under

section 27(1) of the Act and'to pay a fine of Taka

10,00,000 (Taka ten lac), in default, to suffer 1(one)

year imprisonment more and also forfeited his prop-

erties.



4. On appeal, the High Court Division,

allowed the appeal, both on merit as well as on

points of law and set aside the order of conviction

and sentence passed by the Special Judge.



5. Regarding the allegation of concealment of

valuation of the house of the respondent No.1 at

Banani, the learned Special Judge, on the basis of



            
the depositions of the PWD officials and Exhibit.

16.  held that he concealed the excess cost for con-

id house. But the High Court

division did not consider them either independent

ore  father, found their valuation

unreliable. The High Court Division, on the other

hand, relied on the depositions given by the offi

of the Tax Department and Exhibit 12 which were

completely ignored by the leamed Special Judge

and set aside its findings in this respect, holding that

the learned Special Judge committed illegality in

treating the PWD officials as neutral.





6. Regarding the house at Comilla, the

jearned Special Judge disbelieved the contention

raised on behalf of the respondent No.1 that the said

house was constructed with the advance obtained

from the Agrani Bank, on the basis of the deposi-

tions adduced by the officials of the PWD and found

the allegations of concealment proved agianst him.

But the High Court Division found on re-apprecia-

tion of evidence that the findings of the learned

Special Judge is contrary to the evidence on record.



7. appears from the Judgment of the High

Court Division that the learned Additional Attorney-

General conceded that the learned Special Judge

was wrong in holding that the respondent No.1 con-

cealed any amount in respect of his Comilla house.

It also appears that the learned Advocate appearing

on behalf of the Commission did not make any sub-

mission in respect of the house of the respondent

No.1 at Comilla.



8. Regarding the ground floor of the house

known as Sultana Bhaban, the High Court Division

on the basis of the depositions of PWs 1, 30, 33 and

37 disagreed with the findings of the learned Special

Judge that the respondent No.1 concealed any

amount in his statement in respect of the said house.



9. Regarding the filling station, the High

Court Division, on the basis of the depositions of

PWs 30 and 33, found that the learned Special Judge

acted illegally in not considering the deposition of

PW 33 that the filling station is not owned by the



respondent No.1 and held that there is no evidence

that he procured any of the assets beyond his known

source of income through illegal means.



10. Regarding the lands at Kachua, the High

Court Division, found that the learned Special Judge

without giving any reasoning held that the respon-

dent No.1 concealed an amount in respect of the said

lands at Kachua, rather, on appreciation of evidence,

the High Court Division, held that there is no con-

cealment of assets in his statement.



11. The learned Special Judge held further that

although the respondent No.1 had huge amount of

balance in his accounts kept in different banks. he

disclosed only Taka 90,000 in his statement of assets

 but the High Court Division on the contrary found

on evidence that the appellant does not have any bal-

ance in the accounts which contradict the amounts

mentioned in his statement of assets or the income

tax returns furnished by him.



12. So far the finding of the learned Special

Judge that the respondent No.1 concealed the FDRs

worth Taka 1.17 crore is concerned, the High Court

Division, on evidence, found that the appellant fur-

nished various sources for his FDRs, which was not

controverted by the prosecution, as such, held that

the findings of the learned Special Judge in this

Tespect is not correct.



13. We have considered the Judgments and

Orders passed by the learned Special Judge as well

as that of the High Court Division. We have also

heard the learned Advocates for both the sides.



14. It appears that in respect of the valuation of

various immovable properties, FDRs and cash in

hand or in bank accounts, as furnished by the

respondent No.1, in response to the notice under

section 26(2) of the Act, the High Court Division, in

disagreeing with the findings of the learned Special

Judge, held that there is no evidence that the appel-

lant procured any of those assets, movable or

immovable, beyond his known source of income

through illegal means.



            
15. We do not find any reason to disagree with

those findings of fact arrived at by the High Court

Division, in allowing the appeal and setting aside

the order of conviction and sentence passed by the

Special Judge, Court, No.3, Dhaka.



16. The High Court Division, however, misin-

terpreted section 32 of the Act, the original as well

as the amended one, in holding that a sanction by the

Commission is required before lodging an FIR. The

High Court Division, further misconceived the

amended section 32 and wrongly held that a further

sanction is required to take cognizance of the

offence by the Court in spite of the sanction given

earlier under sub-section (2) of section 32 of the Act.

But as a matter of fact, no sanction is required to file

a complaint (Sférat) and the unamended as well as

the amended section 32 requires only one sanction

from the Commission. Now let us consider section

32 along with the connected Rules.



Section 32 (unamended) reads as follows :



The confusion is in respect of the words appearing in two places in the above

section, It may be argued that the above words mean

‘lodging of the first information report’, It is not so.

It means at least so far this Act is concerned, the

formal initiation of the prosecution on submission of

the charge sheet before the Court.



17. Section 34 of the Act provides for framing

of the Rules in order to fulfill the purpose of the Act.



Accordingly, the Rules were framed on 29-3-2997



18. Let us first examine the scheme of the

Rules.



19. The first chapter gives the definition

various words. The second chapter deals with th,

lodging of the complaint and its scrutiny. The heag.

ing of the chapter is “Sfeent ATW". The wory

‘afscmtt’ is defined in section 2(Kha). It is as fo}.

lows :



‘ofan of waa aa CePrES SIT,

fraca sir a SA Cr GRA ecmtatat aep,

ave Gifts a fafas orercas feet oy cree

ae sfscat;



The complaint (@fcat) which is synonymous

to lodging of a first information reprot with the

police, can be filed with the offices of Commission

under rule 3 but the complaints (@féva7) can also be

filed with the concerned police station under Rule 4,

but after registering (tafS@17ge) the same there, it

will be forwarded to the Commission.



20. The investigation of the allegations men-

tioned in the schedule will conducted, under section

20 of the Act, by an officer of the Commission,

assigned for that purpose.



21. Chapter V of the Rules deals with the

charge-sheet. The heading of the chapter is as fol-

lows:



Ror”



22. The heading of rule 13 is as follows :

“yo. UMTS SfScMTATT (charge shee!) |



Wied siicrs CCITT 1”



Rule 13 envisages that after conclusion of



investigation (©48) on obtaining sanction from the

Commission, a case can be instituted (Ste HIG).



23. Rule 14 envisages that for filing of a com

plaint with the offices of the Commission or for



            
lodging the same with the police, no sanction will be

required.



24. Sub-ule (4) of rule 15 stipulates that only

in case of submission of charge sheet (SfSeusTATT

wma CNM HAA), prior sanction from the

Commission will required,



25. From the above discussions, it will be clear

that the words “31 ¥Itwz" means institution of a

case by submission ofa charge sheet by an officer of

the Commission, before the concerned Court and

certainly not an first information report as envisaged

under section 154 of the Code of Criminal

Procedure or a complaint (@fScmt) as envisaged

under rule 3 and rule 4 of the Rules.



26. Under the circumstances, the irresistible

conclusion is that no sanction will be required to file

a complaint (SfScu) either with the Commission or

with the police, But sanction from the Commission

shall be required both under the unamended and the

amended section 32, before institution of a case

(ATS AICHCAA CHT) in the concerned Court.



27. The High Court Division, however, mis-

conceived the amended section 32 also in holding

that sanction from the Commission will be required

under sub-section (1) of section 32. This is not so.

There is no provision for according the sanction

twice-over. Sanction from the Commission will be

required when the charge sheet is filed under sub-

section (2) and on receipt of the charge sheet along

with a copy of the letter of sanction the Court takes

cognizance of the offence for trial, either under the

original section 32 or the amended section 32. As a

matter of fact, only one sanction will be required

under section 32, unamended or amended.



28. Section 32(amended) reads as follows :



21 Sire aye aefreriel (>)

Garena arate a1 cee: THA Gy TA A TI.

faye eee a cea, efienra wry ([anction)

wafers Gr OMe a arte wai GT aerate



feoraned ence sre (cognizance) #04 41!



(2) 08 citer ealtier cary aetna wae ofeorne

wear ta CHEN afad once aera aiferm

aifaara ocd afer Arcana sro fart wene aferera

ate ore won oath af afocanae afes



orarerce wifia afer) = (underlinings are mine)



29. Under the above amended section, after

completion of the investigation, the investigating

officer, under sub-section (2) of section 32, on

obtaining the sanction from the Commission, would

submit the police report before the Court along with

a copy of the letter of sanction. The Court, under

sub-section (1), would take cognizance, only when

there is such sanction from the Commission. Both

the sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of the section

32 envisages only one sanction, not two. Sub-sec-

tion (1) does not spell out or even envisage filing of

any fresh sanction when the sanction to prosecute

has already been filed along with the charge sheet of

the investigating officer. It only envisages that with-

out such sanction from the Commission (#7

wACAAA fSeat*) as spelt out in sub-section (2), no

Court shall take cognizance of the offence (@F

SRS ot ora SAA cA Gert od STA

%¢ Sats Ft) under sub-section (1) of section 32.



30. The High Court Division, however, on con-

sideration sub-rule (7) of rule 15 of the Fife wR

fafearn, 2004 (the Rules) held that sanction is

required to be filed at the time of institution of the

case (STWAl AIHA C#TH) on the erroneous under-

standing that sanction shall also be required at the

time of lodging an first information report. But as a

matter of fact, the Act as well as the Rules do not

envisage lodging of any first information report but

only a complaint (SfSta) either under rule 3 or

tule 4 of the Rules and no sanction is required to file

any complaint.



31. In the instant case, an officer of the

Commission lodged a first information report on 6-

3-2007 with the Tejgaon Police Station and a case

was started, This is not envisaged under rules 3 and

4 of the Rules. Those rules provide only for filing of

the complaint involving the offences mentioned in



            
the Schedule to the Act. However, those provisions

are merely directory and deviation from provisions

in lodging an first information report instead of a

complaint, would not vitiate the proceedings.



32. It that an officer of the

Commission conducted an investigation into the

allegations lodged against the respondent No.1 and

after obtaining sanction from the Commission, sub-

mitted the charge sheet on 29-4-2007 and a supple-

mentary charge sheet on 21-5-2007. This is in due

compliance of sub-section (2) of section 32 read

with sub rule (1) of rule 13, sub-rule (4) and sub-rule

(7) of rule 15 of the Rules.



33. In due course, the Judge of the

Metropolitan Senior Special Judge, Dhaka, took

cognizance of the offences against the respondent

No.1 on 6-5-2007, as envisaged under sub-section

(1) of section 32. Thereafter, the case was trans-

ferred to the Court of Special Judge, Court No.3, for

trial. On 27-5-2007, charge was framed against the

respondent No.1 after rejection of his petition for

discharge of the charges under section 241A of the

Code.



34. On the basis of the discussions made

above, we are unable to agree with the learned

Judges of the High Court Division that the Special

Judge committed any illegality in taking cognizance

of the offence without sanction from the

Commission purportedly under section 32(1) of the

Act. As a matter of fact the requirement of sub-sec-

tion (1) of section 32 was complied with when the

charge sheet was filed along with a copy of the sanc-

tion from the Commission. As such, there was no

illegality in taking cognizance by the learned Judge

of the Metropolitan Senior Special Judge.



35. However, the case was a nullity from the

very beginning. This legal position ought to have

considered by the learned Special Judge while dis-

posing of the petition filed under section 241A of

the Code.



36. It may be recalled that after Proclamation

of Emergency in the country on 11-1!-2007, the



respondent No.1 was arrested by the joint forces oy

3-2-2007, under the provisions of rule 16 of the

Emergency Powers Rules, 2007, and while he Was

in such custody, he was put under detention unde,

the provisions of the Special Powers Act. While jp

such detention, the Secretary of the Commission

issued a notice dated 18-2-2007 under the proyj.

sions of sections 18 and 26 of the Act. This notice

was served upon the respondent No.1 on 20-2-2007,

It directed him to submit his statement of assets

within 72 hours.



37. It appears that all the Commissioners

resigned from the Commission on 7-2-2007 and it

was reconstituted on 24-2-2007, as such, although

the Commission existed as an Institution on 18-2.

2007, when the notice was issued, but there was no

Commission within the meaning of section 3 read

with section 5 of the Act on that date.



38. The Commission, under section 18 of the

Act, exercises its various powers subject to and

under the Act through its Commissioners or through

its officers, as duly empowered in this behalf.



39. Section 26 provides for declaration of

assets. Sub-section (1) reads as follows :





The section provides that if the Commission is

satisfied (19% &) that a person has in his possession

assets beyond his known source of income through

illegal means then the Commission by an order in



            
writing (Oa RA SAMA, AVS OMT WAL.)

direct the said person to submit the description of all

his assets and liabilities.



40. This section unmistakably provides that

before issuance of any such notice the Commission

must be ‘satisfied’ that the concerned person owns or

is in possession of the properties beyond his known

source of income through illegal means. This 'satis-

faction’ must be of the Commission itself constitut-

ed of no other person than its Commissioners. The

relevant order to submit assets may be issued by any

of its authorised officials but the decision to issue

such an order must be recorded by the

Commissioner(s).



41. In the present case, the notice dated 18-2-



2007, under section 26 of the Act, was issued by the

Secretary of the Commission but he does not repre-

sent the Commission, he is only one of its employ-

ees, to carry out the decision of the Commission.

But at the relevant time there were no

Commissioners, as such apparently, the Secretary

issued the notice on 18-2-2007, on his own, without

any Satisfaction and decision from the Commission,

in violation of section 26 of the Act. The concerned

authorities on realizing this error, tried to cover it up

by inserting sub-section (2) in section 18 on 18-4-

2004, by Ordinance No. VII of 2007. Sub-section

(2) provides for ex post facto ratification of the acts

done by the officers of the Commission during the

period from 7-2-2007 to 24-2-2007, without any

authorization from the Commission, but the ques-

tion of jurisdiction goes to the root of the matter. If

any person acts beyond his authority, to the preju-

dice of any person, such acts cannot be ratified or

validated by post facto legislation, his action

remains void.



42. Besides, section 26 envisages that before

issuance of the notice, the Commissioner(s) must be

satisfied about the allegation. It is their satisfaction

and of nobody elses. But by sub-section (2) of sec-

tion 18, the Commissioners can only ratify the ‘sat-

isfaction' of the Secretary which is certainly not stip-

ulated in section 26,



h, the notice dated 1-2-2007, issued

by the Secretary in favour of the respondent l,

was not issued on behalf of the Commission as

envisaged under section 26, and is without jurisdic-

tion and void abinitio.



44, Besides, the notice dated 18-2-2007 was

not a notice required by law, the notice directed the

respondent No.1, a detenu, to submit return of his

assets within a period of 72 hours, is itself a worst

example of arbitrary action on the part of the con-

cerned authority. A notice must allow a reasonable

time to check-up the details of the assets of a person,

if necessary, on examination of his records and after

consultation with his lawyers and other concerned

persons. Section 26 certainly does not envisage a

notice upon a person who is in detention and he is

not expected to give any details of his assets within

the time specified. The person concerned must be

afforded a fair and reasonable opportunity to

respond to the notice, otherwise, it is no notice in the

eye of law. A notice issued under section 26 of the

Act to a detenu, away from his hearth and home,

cannot be said to be a fair and bonafide exercise of

power.



45. Under the circumstances, we are of the

opinion that the notice dated 18-2-2007, issued by

Secretary to the Commission, was without any law-

ful authority, as such, void and any proceeding

based on the said void notice is a nullity in the eye

of law.



46. There is, however, no legal impediment for

the Commission to issue fresh notice under section

26 of the Act, if so advised, but not in those c:

where the accused has already been acquitted on

merit of the case as is in this case,



With these observations, this petition is dis-

missed,



Ed.



            
AYFELLATE DIVISION

(Civil)

Khondker Delwar Hossain

Secretary, BNP & another

egeRT STUN ELUM Petitioners



Md Tafazzul Islam CJ

Md Fazlul Karim J

Md Abdul Matin J



Md M Hossain J

SK Sinha J



VS



Bangladesh Italian Marble



Judgment Works and others



February 1st

Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972

Article 142



Parliament though may amend the Constitu-

tion under Article 142 but cannot make the Cons-

titution subservient to any other Proclamations

etc. or cannot disgrace it in any manner since the

Constitution is the embodiment and solemn

expression of the will of the people of

Bangladesh, attained through the supreme sacri-

fice of nearly three million martyrs. The Parlia-

ment, by amendment of the Constitution cannot

legitimize any illegitimate activity.



The Parliament cannot ratify and validate

those unconstitutional acts of usurpers as the

Parliament is not supreme over everything else

like the Parliament of the United Kingdom,

rather it is independent of other organs of the

State, but it certainly operates within certain

parameters under the Constitution.



Constitution—Supreme Law



Since the Constitution is the Supreme law of

the land and the Martial Law Proclamations,

Regulations and Orders promulgated made by

the usurpers, being illegal, void and non-est in

the eye of law, could not be ratified or confirmed



*Civil Petition for live to Appeal Nos. 1044 & 1045 of

2009.

(From the judgment and order dated 29th August



passed by the High Court Division in Writ Petition No. 6016

of 2000.



(195, 196),



by the Second Parliament by the Fifth Ameng,

ment, as it itself had no such power to enact Such

laws as made by the above Proclamations,

Martial Law Regulation or orders.



Effect of Martial Law



They serve the “people” and can neve,

become the masters of the “people”. Accordingly

Martial Law is unconstitutional and illegal ang it

is a mischievous device not founded in any Jay

known in Bangladesh and by Martial Law the

whole nation is hijacked by some people with the

support of the armed forces and the whole nation

goes into a state of siege; it is like that the whole

nation and “We, the people of Bangladesh”, are

taken hostage and further like a hostage-taking

situation, the hostage takers themselves recog.

nize that there is a superior law than their

weapons which “We, the people” put in their

hands to serve us and they recognize that there

are two impediments to their taking over power

or assuming power, first, the Constitution itself

and so they, at first, start by saying “Notwith-

standing anything in the Constitution” because

they recognize that the Constitution is superior

but they choose to brush it aside. The second

impediment to Martial Law is the Superior

Court of the Republic entrusted with the solemn

duty to “preserve, protect and defend the Cons-

titution” and so every Martial Law, immediately

upon Proclamation seeks to curb the powers of

the Court, particularly, the powers of the Cons-

titutional Court.



Doctrine of necessity



Doctrine of State necessity is no magic wand:

It does not make an illegal act a legal one, But the

Court in exceptional circumstances, in order (0

avert the resultant evil of illegal legislations, may

condone such illegality on the greater interest of

the community in general but on condition that



            
those acts could have been legally done at least by

the proper authority, authority (210)



Doctrine of Severability



While declaring any law ultra vires, the

Court often applies the doctrine of severability to

limit the application of the judicial verdict, This

is no legislative act though such a decision modi-

fies or even destroys a legi



Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972

Articles 6 and 150



We are inclined to condone the substituted

provision of Article 6 of the Constitution. We

have also expunged the findings of the High

Court Division made in respect of Article 150 of

the Constitution and the Fourth Schedule taking

in view of the subsequent development. ....... (229)



Articles 44 and 102



A citizen of Bangladesh is entitled to move

the High Court Division under Article 102 for the

enforcement of the rights conferred in Part III.

This substitution of Article 44, no doubt, was

designed to advance rule of law and the welfare

of the people and accordingly it needs to be

retained for the interest of justice.



Article 102(2)



Sub-article (1) of Article 102 though was

deleted by the Fourth Amendment has been

restored by the Second Proclamation (Tenth

Amendment) Order, 1977. The restoration of

sub-article (1) of Article 102, being beneficial,

should be condoned for the wider public interest.



Article 95



Article 95 will remain as it existed on August

15, 1975. However, in view of the declarations

given in the Judges case (Supra) declaring that

convention of consultation being, a Constitu-



tional imperative, is binding upon everybody.

Accordingly this retention of substituted Article

95 will have no bearing on the matter of consul-

tation, ne (235)



Articles 115 and 116

The words, “but we find no provision in the

Constitution which curtails, demolishes or other-

wise abridges this independence” do not depict

the actual picture because unless Articles 115 and

116 are restored to their original position, inde-

pendence of judiciary will not be fully achieved.

aeaee (237)



Articles 115 and 116



Articles 115 and 116 of the Constitution will

be restored to their original position by the Par-

liament as soon as possible. (240)



Constitution of Bangladesh, 1972

Article 7



Article 7 of the Constitution the Military

Rule, direct or indirect, is to be shunned once for

all. Let it be made clear that Military Rule was

wrongly justified in the past and it ought not to

be justified in future on any ground, principle,

doctrine or theory whatsoever as the same is

against the dignity, honour and glory of the

nation that it achieved after great sacrifice; it is

against the dignity and honour of the people of

Bangladesh who are committed to uphold the

sovereignty and integrity of the nation by all

means; it is also against the honour of each and

every soldier of the Armed Forces who are oath

bound to bear true faith and allegiance to

Bangladesh and uphold the Constitution which

embodies the will of the people, honestly and

faithfully to serve Bangladesh in their respective

services and also see that the Constitution is

upheld, it is not kept in suspension, abrogated, it

is not subverted, it is not mutilated, and to say the

least it is not held in abeyance and it is not



            
amended by any authority not competent to do so

under the Constitution,

Extra Constitutional adventure



Our total disapproval of Martial Law and

suspension of the Constitution or any part there-

of in any form, The perpetrators of such illegali-

ties should also be suitably punished and con-

demned so that in future no adventurist, no

usurper, would dare to defy the people, their

Constitution, their Government, established by

them with their consent. However, it is the

Parliament, which can make law in this regard.

Let us bid farewell to all kinds of extra constitu-

tional adventure forever.



Anwar Hossain vs Bangladesh BLD (Special) 1 = 41

DLR (AD) 165; Nasiruddin vs Government 32 DLR (AD)

216; Ehteshamuddin vs Bangladesh 33 DLR (AD) 154;

Halima Khatun vs Bangladesh 30 DLR (SC) 207; State vs

Joynal Abedin 32 DLR (AD) 110; 44 DLR (AD) 154; 207

US 288; 59 DLR (AD) 289; 60 DLR (AD) 57; 3 BLC

(AD) 89; Pakistan Supreme Court in Zafar Ali Shah vs

General Parvez Mosharraf, PLD 2000 SC 869; Marbury

vs Madison, 1 Cranch 137; Grace Brothers Pty Ltd vs

Commonwealth, 72 CLR 269, 289; Madzimbamutu vs

Lardner-Burke (1968) 3 All ER 561; Asma Jilani vs

Punjab PLD 1972 SC 139; Nurul Islam's case 33 DLR

(AD) 201; Ekushey Television Ltd. vs Dr. Chowdhury

Mohamood Hasan 54 DLR (AD) 130; Bangladesh Bank

vs Administrative Appellate Tribunal, 44 DLR (AD) 239;

Marbury vs Madison, (1803) 5 US 137; Chisholm vs

Georgia 2 US 419; Republic of Fiji vs Prasad [2001] 2

LRC 743, UDM vs South Africa (No.1) [2003]; 4 LRC 98,

Re: 19th Amendment to the Constitution (Sri Lanka)

[2003]; 4 LRC 290, Taione vs Kingdom of Tonga [2005]

4 LRC 661; Njoya vs AG (Kenva) [2004] 4 LRC 559;

Kazi Mokhlesur Rahman vs Bangladesh 26 DLR (AD)



44; Ibrahim vs Emperor, AIR 1914 PC 155; Ekushey

Television Ltd vs Chowdhury Mohamood Hasan, 54 DLR

(AD) 130; Bangladesh Bank vs Administrative Appellate

Tribunal, 44 DLR (AD) 239; Jafar Ali Shah vs Genera}

Parvez Musharraf PLD 2000 SC 869; Dr. Nurul Islam ys

Bangladesh 33 DLR (AD) 201; AT Mridha vs State 25

DLR 335; Md Shoib vs Government of Bangladesh 27

DLR 315; Kudrat-e-Elahi Panir vs Bangladesh 44 DLR

(AD) 319; Liyanage vs R [1967] AC 259; EG Aptheker vs

Secretary of State 378 US 500 (1964); Harris vs Minister

of Interior 1952(2) SA 428; Fazlul Quader Chowdhury vs

Md Abdul Haque PLD 1963 SC 486 = 18 DLR (SC) 69;

SP Gupta vs President of India AIR 1982 SC 152;

Secretary, Ministry of Finance vs Masdar Hossain 2000

BLT (AD) 234 = 52 DLR (AD) 82; Usif Patel vs Crown

PLD 1955 FC 387 = 7 DLR (FC) 38; Md Ismail vs State,

PLD 1969 SC 24 =21 DLR (SC)I61; Fazal Ahmed vs

State PLD 1969 SC 241; Federation of Pakistan vs Maulvi

Tamizuddin Khan PLD 1955 FC 240 = 7 DLR (FC) 291;

Reference by His Excellency the-Governor General in

Special Reference No.1 of 1955; PLD 1955 FC 435 =7

DLR (FC) 395; Dalbir Singh vs India,1979 AIR 1384;

Bangladesh vs Mizanur Rahman, 52 DLR (AD) 149;

Oacker vs Packer (1953) 2 All ER 127; Lois P Myers vs

United States 272 US 52 (1926); Proprietary Articles

Trade Association vs Attorney-General of Canada 1931

All ER 277 PC; Grace Brothers Proprietary Limited vs

Commonwealth (1946) 72 CLR 269; Frederick Walz vs

Tax Commission of New York 25 L Ed 2d 697 (397 US

664) (1970); Motor General Traders vs State of Andhra

Pradesh AIR 1984 SC 121; Proprietary Articles Trade

Association vs Attorney-General for Canada, 1931 AC

310; Attorney-General for Australia vs Queen and the

Boilermakers’ Society of Australia, 1957 AC 288; SR

1994 SC 1918;

Madzimbamutu vs Lardner Burke (1968) 3 All ER 561,



Bommai vs Union of India AIR



            
